- ... were standing there. Everyone is waiting,
'cause at any moment an arrow could just
fly through your neck, and there's
people holding shotguns. And the
anthropologist, this little guy, is standing
there in the front, and he's going,
"Enimole." He's going, "Brothers."
And then it happened. Then you
start hearing people screaming,
"Mashco! Mashco!" And people
are screaming and women are
lifting children and running into the
huts and the dogs and chickens are going
nuts and—
- So fear, fear.
- Fear. He's going, "Look there. He has a
bow. He has a bow." And we're looking
up the beach and there's just this
clan walking down the beach with
these seven-foot bows and they're hunched over
and they're pointing at us. They're going,
"Look at that one. Look, there's a gun
there." And you can see them communicating
to each other and the butterflies are swirling
off the beach and they can hit a spider
monkey out of the treetops
at 40 meters. They can sneak
up and you will never know they're there.
And so when that arrow passes through your
body, you'll only have a moment to
realize it before you fall over.
In order for any of this to make sense,
I have to show you this footage.
- And this has not been shown ever before.
- This is a world first.
- The following is a conversation with Paul
Rosolie, his third time on the podcast.
Paul is a naturalist, explorer,
writer and is someone who has
dedicated his life to protecting the
Amazon rainforest and celebrating
the beauty of the natural world.
He has a new book coming out in
a few days titled Jungle Keeper
that you should definitely
go pre-order now.
It tells some intense stories about
his time in the jungle over the
past several years, building up to a
few epic recent events, including a new
extended encounter with a non-contacted
tribe that we discuss in this podcast.
Both the book and audiobook are great.
I highly recommend it. If you would
like to support Paul and his team
in their mission to protect the
jungle, go to junglekeepers.org.
You can help with donations or
by spreading the word or checking out the
gala that Paul is hosting in New York
on January 22nd in a few days.
They are doing all they can to help
raise funds for the mission of
safeguarding as much of the
rainforest as possible,
and I think it's a mission
worth fighting for.
The Amazon jungle is one of the most
special and beautiful places on Earth.
As an aside, allow me to look back
briefly and mention something that
I've been struggling with a bit.
For context, I traveled to the Amazon
rainforest with Paul a while back.
It was an adventure of a lifetime,
with lots of crazy twists and turns.
We did record a podcast out
there, literally in the jungle.
Episode 429, if you want to go
check it out. It was awesome.
And we also recorded a bunch of disparate
footage of the journey just for fun.
And I would still love to somehow
put all that together into a cohesive
video in case it's interesting to someone.
But I've learned just how difficult it is
to organize and edit a pile of
chaotically recorded footage like that.
So, let's see if I can pull it off.
But in any case, this kind of raw
vlog-style video is something that I
would love to be able to do more of
as a way to celebrate amazing
human beings like Paul and others,
including everyday people who I meet
on my travels. So, I'll keep trying,
tinkering, learning, and I ask for your
patience and support along the way.
Now, back to our regularly scheduled
programming. This is the Lex Fridman Podcast.
To support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description where you
can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give
feedback, and so on. And now, dear
friends, here's Paul Rosolie.
We've survived a challenging time
out in the jungle about a year and a
half ago, and since then, your life has
increasingly gotten more
intense. So, you've achieved
the incredible feat of saving now more
than 130,000 acres of rainforest.
And the goal that you're working towards
is protecting 200,000 acres more.
And doing so while facing
extreme danger from narcos,
narco-traffickers, so-called
Cocaine Mafia in an escalating
drug war. This is insane.
These are new developments.
Illegal loggers, as we've talked
about before. Gold miners, and the
incredible recent encounter
with an uncontacted
tribe. And we'll talk about
all of this. So your new
book, Jungle Keeper, opens with
the killing of two loggers
by the warriors of an uncontacted
tribe, the Mashco Piro, in August 2024.
And then you reveal that you had your own
dramatic encounter with the tribe two
months later in October 2024. So if I
may, let me read the opening of the book.
"Far out on the western edge
of the Amazon rainforest, deep
in the Peruvian jungle, a
pair of loggers plunged their
chainsaws into the buttressed roots of
an ancient ironwood. An ironwood, or
shihuahuaco, of this size
is a giant among giants, an
emergent sentinel that
reaches heights of 160 feet,
towering over the rest of the
canopy." I've read that many are
over 1,000 years old, by the way,
as an aside. And you've found
ones that are 1,200 years old.
- Incredibly old.
- Anyway, you continue. "This particular
tree had started its life as a
tiny sapling in the great jungle,
a story that began before the
Spanish reached Peru, long before
the United States was even a
dream. At a time when
Leonardo da Vinci was still
honing his talents in a far away
part of the world, through the
Renaissance, the First and Second
World Wars, and the birth of our
grandparents." This tree
was out there slowly
charging upward, anonymous, just
one pillar among the billions
of others. But on this day, in August
2024, when the two loggers worked, this
witness of the centuries came
crashing down to the canopy
with such cataclysmic power
that it shook the earth.
And then you go on to talk about
how the shaking of the earth was
felt and heard by the uncontacted tribe.
You go on to describe how these
particular loggers were killed
by the uncontacted tribe of
Mashco Piro. What do we know about these
warriors of the uncontacted tribe?
- We know that across the Amazon basin
there's still perhaps thousands of clans of
uncontacted peoples,
people that are living in
nomadic isolation in what remains of the intact
Amazon basin and want to remain that way.
And so, what happened with
these loggers was that
local people told them,
"Don't go out there. Don't go
into these territories." And what happens is that
people that aren't from... There's this thing with
the jungle, people don't believe that
it's as wild as the legends say.
And so when they say there's
calatos out there, there's
wild people out there,
these loggers from another region
go, "Yeah, that's just some story.
We're fine. We'll go. We have
shotguns." They don't realize
you're dealing with a
civilization of people that is
still nomadic, still uses
bamboo-tipped arrows, still
lives naked in the Amazon rainforest,
has knowledge of medicines that we've
yet to encounter or may never
discover, and that they can
hit a spider monkey out of the
treetops at 40 meters. And so
while you're using a chainsaw, they
can sneak up and you will never know
they're there. And so when that
arrow passes through your body,
you'll only have a moment to
realize it before you fall over.
- And we're looking at something
you posted on your Instagram-
... which are the arrows that they
use, which are bigger than you.
So they're like six or seven feet.
- Six, seven feet. More like
seven feet. And that's-
- Look how sharp that is.
- ... incredibly sharp. They cure it over the
fire and they have a way of sharpening it.
That edge of bamboo becomes incredibly
knife-sharp. You can cut meat with it
easily; I've done it. These
arrows... Look at that. I mean, I'm
5'9". That's easily a seven-foot arrow.
- Yeah, so for people who are just
listening, this "arrow" is really a spear.
Some people would think it was a spear, but
they're shooting this thing with a gigantic bow.
That's crazy.
- Yeah, and so to be holding that...
Look at that, they even twist the
fletching so the arrow spins in
the air. They have incredible
craftsmanship, and then you see all the little
string on there is plant fibers they've
woven, and then this is them.
- Yeah, the warriors of the tribe.
- The warriors of the tribe. And so the
fact that we're sitting here talking
on microphones, and that we have airplanes
and cell phones and all the things we have in
the modern world, and there's still...
We still live in this age where there's,
right now at this moment, people
living out in the jungle who have been
there since before history,
is an incredible thing.
- Let me look this up on Perplexity:
what are the technologies
we modern humans have
that the Mashco Piro do
not? It's just interesting
to think about the kind of
technologies we take for
granted. Energy and power,
obviously all the electricity generation,
grids, batteries, solar panels, and
electric motors, metals and
materials, mass-produced steel,
aluminum, advanced alloys,
plastics, composites, glass,
concrete, all of those things.
- All of those things.
- Tools, of course, and machinery.
The infrastructure of
roads and bridges and buildings, and the
weapons of war—everything but the spears
and arrows that they have—and the
medicine and biology. Of course they
probably have complicated medicines
that they've developed for their own—
...that are available within the jungle.
- I mean, that entire list is no.
- No.
- I mean, metal, I think you have to
be able to excavate into the earth
and forge metal.
These people don't even... As one of
the local anthropologists said to me, a
Peruvian anthropologist, he said,
"You know, people think of them as
Stone Age tribes." And he was like, "They
don't have stones." He's like, "They don't..."
So they don't know that water... They
see water that they drink. They don't
know that water freezes, because they've never
seen it. They don't know that water boils,
because they don't even make clay pots. They
just have their bamboo and their string.
And so they're living an
incredibly simple life. So all of
that, I mean, even a camera is a miracle
to them. You have to bend your mind to
even understand how far back they are.
It's like looking into thousands
of years ago, like the Stone Age.
- When they hear the sounds of the chainsaws,
the sounds of machinery in the distance-
...I wonder how they can possibly
comprehend what that is.
- I think they view it as a demonic
destructive force. And when I show you the
encounter that we had,
we got a few takeaways.
We left with more questions than
answers, but one of the things they were
able to communicate across the
language barrier was, "Why are you
cutting down the trees?"
They don't like it.
- Yeah. That represents to them the
danger and destruction that
the outside world brings.
- They see us as the destroyers of worlds.
- So tell me about this
encounter in October of 2024.
- So, in order to tell you about
that encounter I think we need to
orient people into where we're talking
about. We're talking about this river that
runs through the western edge of
the Amazon rainforest that you know
well now, after spending time
there with me. It's a high
tributary of the Amazon where you
have the main river channel and
then smaller and smaller and smaller
tributaries. And the smaller
you get, the less trafficked
they are. And so this river has
remained wild through the centuries. And
even during the '90s when there was a
mahogany boom where people went out for it,
trees, there were very few
people going up this river.
20 years ago when I first got to the region and
people told me there were uncontacted tribes
out there, it was always in
the realm of something...
You know, it's like people say,
"There's Bigfoot," or, "Don't go there,
it's haunted." It was
like a tall tale almost.
And even the Peruvian government at the
time I first went to Peru, which was
2006, their official position
was that the tribes are a
myth. There's no such thing as
the tribes. That was the official
position. And you just... You would
hear these stories of people that got
shot. You'd meet someone high up a
river, four days upriver, deep in the
Amazon, that had an arrow. And you'd
look at this thing and it had this,
you know, mega gravity. And so as we've created
Jungle Keepers and now we're protecting
130,000 acres of this river, we're protecting
the plants and the animals and the
ancient trees, and trying to preserve the ecosystem,
and counting the butterflies and conducting
ecological surveys, and what we've
inadvertently found ourselves
the caretakers of, is the fact that
these people, in order to continue
living, have to remain
isolated, want to remain
isolated. That's their one mandate
as a civilization: the tribes
of the Mashco Piro. And so, in
October, as Jungle Keepers now, we're
working with the indigenous people. What we do
is we take loggers and gold miners and make
them into rangers and give them better
jobs, and we try to protect the forest.
And those people who live
up in the remote indigenous
community, they called us on a satellite
phone and they said, "Directors,
you've been working with us and telling us
you wanna help us. The tribes are coming out.
What do we do?"
- So, even they don't really know, when
the tribes emerge from the deep jungle-
... what to do?
- They were terrified.
- What was your thinking when
you got the phone call?
- When we got the phone call, it was a mix
of... because we're over here trying
to get land concessions and doing all this
important work, and part of me was like,
"That can't be real, so we're
gonna keep our heads down."
- Bigfoot is emerging- ... from the forest.
- Like, yeah, sure. And then we
hung up and we said, "Okay, maybe
tomorrow if they're still there or
something." And then it was crazy because
it was probably about noon and we had an important
day of meetings. We had a meeting with the
police, we had a meeting with the landowner, we were
trying to do all this stuff for the conservation work.
And then I got together with the core team
of directors, JJ, Mohsin, Stéphane, and
we said, "Wait, if this
is real, we have to get
there now. Like now, now." And
so we dropped what we were
doing, canceled the meetings,
and put other people on them. We
got a boat and we called Ignacio,
our most hardcore ranger.
- Who has been shot.
- Who in 2019 was shot in
the head by an arrow
and still bears the scar, and
he barely survived. And we
said, "Look, this is going down." He said, "I
already know because the whole river knows."
We said, "Can you get us there by
tomorrow morning?" And he said, "Look,
it's a two-day journey by boat. So,
no." And we said, "Is there any way you
can you get us there?" And he went,
"I'll get you there." And so we got a
couple of sacks of rice, a couple
of cans of tuna, our dry bags, our
tents. We got on a boat by 6:00 PM
and we started riding up the river
- Through the night?
- ...through the night. And so a two-day boat
journey that we're trying to flex into one
night. And so I was at the
front with the headlamp—
...with the torch. And so the first
few hours it was clear, and that
comet... Remember that comet—
...that was going? There was that comet in the
sky. I remember looking at it and going, "This is
it." I knew this was it. And the
first few hours were clear and the
stars were out and it was beautiful, and
then it clouded over and the lightning
started, and then it just apocalypse
downpoured. And from midnight
until 8:00 AM it was just the front of
the boat with the light, and it was just
a Star Wars vision of raindrops and
galaxies and moths flying
in my eye. People don't
realize you can get hypothermia in the tropics,
but as you're going at night, even if it's
80 degrees outside, in the rain, in
the wind at night, in a lightning
storm, you're freezing. And so by 2:00
AM I'm convulsively shivering, and
we're using the caiman eyes on the
side of the river because it was
so dark we couldn't see where we were
going, so those shine back at you. So I'm
finding the caiman eyes and then
motioning with the light to Ignacio
where to go, and he knew how to find
the channel and we had to jump the
waterfalls. We did the two-day
boat ride in one night.
And we arrive at this community
where... And it's morning now
and the howler monkeys are calling
over the jungle, and the little naked
children are all by the side and
everyone's scared. And we get a
hug from this guy, Bacho, who we know, and
they're like, "Come in, come in, come in."
And they're like, "The tribe came out yesterday.
We saw a few of them on the beach and
they're gone now."
And so we collapsed, we fell asleep.
Rained the whole day. That night we went
out and we looked for them and
there was this crazy moment where
we're standing on this beach and
their footprints were there.
And the local indigenous anthropologist
was standing there, looking out into the
Amazon beyond, and there's just all this
wreckage. It looked like something very
Cormac McCarthy: just dark
sky, iron clouds, and
we're standing there. Everyone is waiting,
'cause at any moment an arrow could
just fly through your neck. And there's
people holding shotguns, and the
anthropologist, this little guy, is standing
there in the front and he's going, "No
mole." He's going, "Brothers." There's
only a few words that intersect
between the languages and he's going,
"Brothers, we're here. We don't want to hurt
you." He's speaking in the Yine language.
And he's saying, "Come out." And you can
tell by their footprints—the trackers
explained this—that you could see...
it was just the balls of their feet. So right
as we pulled up to the beach, they ran.
So they were there listening to
us, and he's going, "Nomole, come
out. It's okay. Lay down your arms.
We'll lay down ours. Nomole."
He just kept saying, "Nomole." And nothing
happened. And we went back to the village and went
to sleep. We wake up the next
morning, and it's 5:00 AM. And
again, we're trying to save the jungle. We're
in a race against time to get these land
concessions. And so my team, like
Mohsin and JJ—Stefan couldn't
come because he was in town signing
paperwork and interviewing loggers
and landowners. And also, he didn't
think there was any chance this
was gonna be real because in his entire
50-something years in the Amazon, he's
never seen them. And so
we're getting ready to leave in the morning. We
had tents on the boat, and Ignacio comes up to
me and he goes, "You're my director,
right? You're my boss?" And I went,
"Yeah." He goes, "I need to talk
to you like a friend." I was like,
"Yeah, shoot. Go." And he goes, "You'd
be an idiot to leave right now."
He goes, "They're coming." And so
he convinced us to stay. We pull
our tents off the boat. Stefan and Mohsin go
off with their cameras. They start shooting,
you know, people. These are
monkey eaters and fishermen—the
community that we're in. And
everything's quiet. And I opened my
laptop, and I was working, just
writing my book. And then it
happened. Then you start
hearing people screaming,
"Mashco, Mashco!" And people
are screaming and women are
lifting children and running into the
huts, and the dogs and chickens are going
nuts. And I mean—
- So fear. Fear.
- Fear.
- Because we should say, the
obvious thing is, as far as
anyone remembers, any minimal,
small encounters with these tribes—
... have been violent.
- Extremely violent. These
tribes have remained alive
because of their violence. Like the Spartans
or the Comanches, they seem to have
adopted violence as a
first response to contact.
- Maybe you can correct me on this,
but I read that in the late 19th
century, early 20th century, there was
documentation of encounters with these tribes
by the private armies
of the rubber barons.
And those encounters were, from the rubber
barons' armies' perspective, violent.
And so maybe the lesson the
uncontacted tribes learned
is that any interaction with the
outside world is gonna have to be
violent because they have
to defend themselves.
- Yeah. You had colonial missionaries
in the 1600s and 1700s. Then you
had the rubber barons, late 1800s
into the 1900s, just periods of
extraction and domination and
cruelty. And these tribes—their
grandparents must have told them, "When
the outside world comes, you shoot
first. That's the only thing
that's gonna keep you alive."
- Do you think the memory of those
violent encounters is defining
to how they think about the world?
- Yeah. Because even in my lifetime there,
in the 20 years I've spent in the
Amazon, Ignacio was shot
in the head. My friend
Victor survived a violent encounter
where they murdered somebody on a
beach. They've shot numerous people.
They've even shot people who were trying
to help them, people who were trying
to give them clothing and bananas.
They call it porcupining them, where they
find a body on the beach with so many
arrows that when they fall over,
all the arrows are sticking up.
And they'll do it out of curiosity
too. It's like, "Hey, you're wearing a
suit. That's weird. We've never seen
anybody in a black and white suit."
The way Teddy Roosevelt would
shoot a bird for science.
They just want to look at
you. And so they're operating
on a different... They don't have the
moral system that we have or understand.
They're truly wild.
- How does Ignacio think about them?
Because they almost killed him.
- Yes. It depends on the mood you
get him in, because if you ask
him... One day I asked him, "If you
could see the people who shot you
in the head, what would you say to them?"
And he looked at me with that Ignacio look
and said, "I wouldn't say anything. I
would kill as many of them as I could."
He also had a time where he
was in a really remote guard
station working for the Ministry of Culture,
and they showed up and he knew that
they were going to kill him.
So he climbed into the peak of
the little structure there. And
just like a dog in a car, that
greenhouse effect in the top at midday
with the sun beating down, he was
huddled over a mattress while
they were walking on the deck—
...moving pots and pans and looking
at our items and artifacts.
And he knew that if he was
found, they'd kill him. But
if he stayed up there, he was literally
frying. He said he was soaking the mattress.
He could feel himself dying. For
two hours he had to stay there.
And he was constantly making this decision:
"If I come out, I die. If I stay,
I probably die." He's like, "Probably
die is better than definitely die."
So he was terrified. And as they're
screaming, "Mashko," everybody's running,
Ignacio comes and finds me. You
can see in his eyes, you can see
when somebody has that PTSD response,
he's breathing heavy.
He's moving behind trees.
He's keeping me close to him and
going, "Look there. He has a bow."
"He has a bow." And we're looking
up the beach, and there's just this
clan of naked men walking down the
beach with these seven-foot bows,
and they're hunched over, pointing at
us. They're going, "Look at that one."
"Look, there's a gun there." You can
see them communicating to each other.
The butterflies are swirling off
the beach. In these moments you go,
"Am I entering a moment that
is— is this a one-way door?"
"Is this an irreversible situation?"
Because there's an unfolding situation
where they're coming towards us. Are
they going to attack? What do they want?
Is there going to be a... I mean, I am
soaked in chills right now talking about
it, because I remember standing there,
going, "There's no way this is real
life." It's burned into my memory, them
walking down the beach with the
bows. And of course, you know,
Stefan is up there firing off pictures
and Mohsin is down getting video.
And the community that
we're with, people had...
You hear shotgun shells loading home.
They're getting ready. And there's this
one guy, this anthropologist named Romel,
who has been the only person who has
communicated with them peacefully. He did it
in 2013, where he stood on the beach
and spoke to them. He knows enough
of the local dialect that
overlaps with theirs that he can
speak to them. And as they're coming down
the beach, the butterflies are flying up,
and we're all waiting. And again,
shotgun, you're talking, you
know, how many meters? 30, 40 meters?
I don't know accurate. For an
arrow, you loose a seven-foot arrow that
weighs nothing, you're talking about
300 meters easy. They can shoot
you from across the river. So
Ignacio was pulling me and he
was like, "Down. You go down."
"You stay behind this tree. Watch them
from there. Watch out, he has an arrow."
He was watching everyone because you could
see, he's like, "This is how it happens."
- Did you think this might be the last day
you have on this earth? Were you afraid?
- I was, yeah, of course I
was afraid. You're with-
I'm with my two best friends and
people that I work very closely
with. You're in the middle of nowhere,
there's no help coming, and you're with-
...26 people and there's
50 of the tribe that you
can see, and you know they're surrounding
us. There are men on the other side
of the river. And then we had
guns looking back towards the
jungle because we knew we were being
surrounded. And so, again, this is
always the story of someone's
uncle, brother, or cousin
telling a story that happened, and now
it's happening. Not in the shadows,
not in the middle of the night.
It's happening in broad daylight.
They're walking out onto the beach.
It's like the first time they saw the
dinosaurs in Jurassic Park.
You're going, "There's no way."
- And you are walking on the knife's
edge. And it's funny you say this,
about taking pictures. Because there's two
ways to think of this situation. This is
fascinating, or this is extremely
dangerous. It's both. It's a knife's edge.
So you could approach it one of two ways.
"If I die, I die. I'm going
to take some good pictures."
- But that was also our
mission. As the directors of
Jungle Keepers, we work with this
community to ensure their lifestyle can
continue, and they're saying,
"Hey, that's great, but as an
indigenous community, we're dealing with
people that raid our stuff, try and
steal our women, and kill our hunters. Now
they're coming out. We want you to see
it." Documenting it is part
of our job. We have to
show what happened that
day. And so those guys were
shooting. And very
seriously, it's actually...
Mohsin's wife and I always joked,
"If the tribe ever comes out,
you stand in front of him, you
take the arrow. He has kids."
And that day, we were
strategically positioning
ourselves, being like,
"You, down. You cannot
get killed." In those moments,
you start to go, "Okay, where
will I be safe from arrows?
Where can I run to the
river if they come over?" And you
start planning, "Okay, if I jump
into the river..." I was going, "Okay, I got my
bag. I have a can of tuna. I have a flashlight."
I was like, "If I jump into the river
and float down and I live, I'm still
days upriver." And so you start
going through all these things.
- And of course, the Mashco Piro people
are thinking exactly the same thing,
probably.
- Well, the interesting thing is that
they're initiating the contact, right?
They are the ones coming out of
the jungle and confronting us.
- And fundamentally, that contact is- they're
at least giving peace a chance. They're
trying the peaceful contact
first, correct? Or was there
a violent element? Like,
what did you sense in the
caution of them emerging to the beach?
- Fear. As they came out, you could
see fear on them because the way
they were hunched over, the
way they had their bows ready,
they were worried. And so they
came and Romel is standing there
closer than any of us at the edge, on
one side of the river. And it was like
shirts versus skins. It was two
tribes looking at each other
with a thousand years of civilization
between them. And Romel's
going, "Put down your bows.
Put down your bows and we can talk."
And he's saying, "Namole, Namole."
He kept saying, "Brothers,
brothers, please put down your..."
- So Namole means brother in a language
that they might be able to understand?
- Namole means brother in a language
that they do understand, and
it seems like they refer to themselves
as the Namoles. The brothers.
- So potentially, that's what they
call themselves as a tribe, Namoles?
- Exactly. And actually, the anthropologists
that we've been speaking to post-event
have been explaining to us
that- you know, Piro is the
group that they're from,
these various nomadic tribes.
And Mashco basically means "wild Piros." One
thing we know they call themselves is Namoles.
- So we might converge towards the
name of this tribe being Namole
versus Mashco Piro?
- The Namoles, yeah. It seems like
the most current self-appointed
identity is the brothers, Namole.
- Anyway, there's these shredded warriors
on the beach. They're gigantic.
- With seven-foot arrows, and
we're all standing there. And so
the first thing, again,
you just think of like the
peace pipe in the old stories.
And the first thing is,
"Let's make them an offering of
peace." So they got a canoe with no
motor, and we piled it
with plantains, just
full of plantains, 16 feet
of endless green bananas.
And then, I mean, the balls on
this guy, the anthropologist-
he gets into the river, takes
the canoe, and it's the
dry season, so the river's only
about three or four feet deep at the
channel. And so he walks
this thing out, this one man
walking in the face of all these
warriors. He takes the boat and he
pushes it towards them. And
they rush out, and they start
grabbing the bananas, and they're
not going, "Okay, we will unload
these bananas and use them
later." They're my bananas.
And they're fighting, yelling,
and they're all grabbing 'em,
and then they push the boat back
and he talks to them a little bit.
It's not a perfect translation,
so he's saying, "Where have you come from?
What do you want? Who's your leader?"
And he's trying to establish these things,
and they all sort of talk at the same
time, like a flock of birds.
It wasn't like one man speaks.
And there were no women.
The women were nowhere
to be seen. And actually,
at one point as we were
preparing, I think it was while we were
preparing the second canoe of bananas,
there was a moment of absolute panic.
It happened when there was a noise
behind us and you just hear shotguns
swing behind us. And, you
know, Mohsin goes down. I go
running away from the river because I
want to see if there's an attack coming.
And I'm standing, me and this guy
were sharing a tree as cover,
and he's got a shotgun and he's
looking back into the forest.
And what was happening was the
women of the tribe had come
silently, and they were just pulling
yucca out of the ground and taking the
banana plants and ruining the farm
completely. They were raiding the farm
behind us while the men were
talking up here. So again,
were they peacefully contacting us or were
they like, "Hey, go make a diversion and
take the food out the back"?
- So I mean, you really were surrounded.
- We were completely surrounded.
- So they could have murdered
all of you, probably.
- Easily. We were outnumbered
five to one at the least.
- Yeah. And maybe they wanted peace,
but part of the reason is they
didn't know how deep this goes.
They didn't know if you had backup.
- They don't know if we have backup.
They also had questions. Some of
their questions were incredible: "How
do we tell the difference between,
how do we know who the good
guys and the bad guys are?"
Because to them, all you
outsiders are the same.
So why, who were the ones
cutting down the trees?
- And those are the ones they
know are the bad guys.
- Well, the big trees seemed to have
incredible significance to them.
They're significant to us in a
different way, but to them, it's
offensive on an almost religious
level to cut a big tree, as
if you're killing their gods.
- So there's a spirituality
to the trees to them.
- It seems like that.
- And so whoever's cutting them down
is a source of destruction on a
spiritual, existential level.
- spiritual, existential level. They
ask, "Why would you destroy our home?"
- In a deep sense, the uncontacted tribes
represent the deep
jungle. And so if they're
threatened, that means the jungle,
the deep jungle is threatened.
- They are the human voice of the jungle and
they're asking questions and they're also
demanding. You know, they're clapping at
us and they're waving and they're saying,
"Send more bananas." And so they loaded up
another boat and they pushed another boat
out, and this time they gave them some rope.
They all had rope tied around
their waists, penises tied up.
But they love rope and some of them
were wearing rope that they had
made, which is brown or reddish. And
then some of them were wearing rope
that they had clearly pillaged from logging
camps or the communities because it was
modern nylon paracord. And they had
this wound around their waists like
a thick belt. And they took
the second boat and they had
some rope and they had
some plantains on there.
- So, some of these guys might have been
the ones that murdered the loggers.
- Could be.
- From a couple of months before that.
- Absolutely, could be. But what Ramal
said as he was talking to them,
he turned to us and he said,
"The other groups call me the
Grandfather." He said, "This group, I don't
know any of these." He said, "This is first
contact." He said, "This is the
first time this group is talking to
us." And you saw people
from maybe 12 years old to
what looks like 40-something,
like a banged-up 40.
And no really old people and no women.
- So this is a particular
clan of the uncontacted-
- It's a particular clan,
- a tribe who they've never contacted.
Is there, just from your memory,
interesting aspects about the way they were
trying to communicate? Like you
said, clapping. I think it's,
from an anthropology perspective, from a human
perspective, fascinating. How do you talk to
people from an uncontacted
tribe like this?
So clapping, yelling. It's interesting
to know that there's not a hierarchy
where there's a leader that represents.
Or is that something we know for sure?
- Before even coming to talk to you
about this, we passed this through
anthropologists and ethicists
and we said, "Look, is it
even okay? Can we talk about this?"
Because if you talk about this,
and you tell people there's these uncontacted
tribes, people have misconceptions.
They go, "They're the last free
people on Earth. We need to go
join them. We want to see them." There's
all this bad stuff that happens,
and all these people want to be left
alone. So the last thing we want to do is
kill the thing we're trying to protect
and tell the world. But at the same
time, they're speaking out. They're
saying, "Stop cutting our trees. Leave
us alone." And so if we're
not successful in the greater
Jungle Keepers' mission of
protecting this river, they cease to
exist. And so advocating
for these people requires
us to have this conversation. It requires
us to have this footage and to show the
world, and then leave them alone.
In order for any of this to make sense,
I have to show you this footage.
- And this has not been shown ever before.
- This is a world first. I mean, up until now...
You know, we're sitting there this day and-
the only thing you've ever seen are these
blurry images of them from someone's
cellphone from 100 meters away of the
uncontacted tribes. And we're sitting there with
800 millimeters with a 2X
teleconverter and, you know, R5s.
And so, this is as we're
looking through the vines,
anticipating the tribe coming. I'll put a
little bit of volume so you can hear it.
And then you can see, this is the moment. This
is us running when they're like, "They're
out. They're coming down the beach."
- Oh, wow. Oh, wow.
- You see how many thousands of
butterflies? But look at the
way they move. Look at the
way they point. Look at him with his bow.
- Wow.
- There it is.
- They're trying to figure out
what they're looking at.
- And they didn't know the cameras were there.
So this was the guys looking out the back.
So he's going, "There's
something back here." He could-
hear the women in the farm. And I'm
looking in every direction because I'm
going, "Which way is
the arrow coming from?"
But see, he has his shotgun. This is just like a
farm shotgun. Even if he shot it, you have to use a
stick to bang out the shell. But
see, as they come closer, they start
laying down their... See, he's laying
down his bow and arrow. They understand.
- So these are warriors, and the way
they were at first moving, it really
looked like they're ready for violence.
And now they're all standing in a relaxed-
And they're smiling? Are they smiling?
- Smiles come at some point. I would say
that one of these guys seemed like
he was in a leadership position.
He did most of the talking.
- What's with the different
hand gestures? This,
the holding your hand up to the
face. All of this means something.
- All of this means something. Some had red
smeared on their faces. Some had yellow.
- Did you have a sense of
hierarchy at all, like the boss?
- Again, there were just these two dominant guys.
And, like, this guy and one other guy who
looked almost like him, like his
brother. A lot of gesturing.
- Wow. This is incredible, Paul.
- Yeah. You see the rope?
Some of that rope is...
- Yeah, I can kind of tell
who the bosses are.
- Right? All right, so a few of But
see, even that, as he's pointing-
what are you pointing at?
- You guys are nuts. You guys are nuts.
- You see, though, they're rushing in.
There's this desperation. They're
hungry. They also—
- Is that in the water, or is that
Ramo in the water in that case?
- The, in this particular video,
it's a guy named Liner.
But see these guys? They're fighting over it.
It's not that we're all going to share it later.
It's, "I get mine, you get yours."
And so what does that mean?
- Yeah. But here, they're in
peaceful mode, for sure.
- Now, after we'd given them,
after we'd given them several boatloads
of bananas, things did calm down.
Ramo said to them, "Look, we've given
you what we can give you. We gave
you sugarcane. We gave you
boatloads of plantains."
And so then there came a time where things
were a little more relaxed. They were walking
around. We had a great moment
where we'd given them the
plantains. We'd given them the
bananas. And he'd said, "Look,
that's it." He said, "We've given
you what you asked for. You
asked for bananas. We don't—
we don't cut the trees here. All of us here
are not tree-cutters. We're indigenous
people." And he couldn't explain
who the hell we were, but they were
like, "We don't cut the trees. We're not the
loggers." And they're like, "Okay." So then
at some point, Ignacio
went out and sort of like
started, you know, he'd go like this
and they'd go like this. And he'd dance
a little bit, they'd dance a little bit.
And then there was this human moment of
just joking.
- So even Ignacio warmed up.
- Even Ignacio warmed up. Once he realized
no one was going to die that day,
things did calm down.
It was a false sense of
security. Here, I'll show you.
There's a couple more things that
are relevant here, though. Yeah, this
is just them interacting with the boat.
- This is truly incredible, man.
- But then they don't have boats. They
don't have stone tools. They don't...
Imagine if you showed them ice.
You know, they wouldn't...
- This is historic.
- I mean, it's the... you
hear of Percy Fawcett
encountering the tribes. We've heard of
anecdotal accounts. This is the first
time that the tribes have been filmed,
that we can hear their voices—
...that there's a documented
interaction happening. I mean, look how
comfortable he's getting. He's
so close. They asked him for his
shirt. He gave his shirt.
- This is incredible.
- They asked him for his pants. He gave
his pants. He was in his underwear.
You see this? The shirt that's over his
shoulder? Ignacio took off his
JungleKeeper shirt and threw it
to the anthropologist, and then the
anthropologist walked off and threw it to them.
So over the shoulder of that
uncontacted naked warrior
is a JungleKeeper shirt
with the logo showing.
- That's great.
- So their, like, their
second shirt and they're...
- You just upgraded that guy's status in
the tribe. He's going to be the new
boss with that shirt.
- He's got a dope polo. And he didn't even
have to order it. But yeah, this is
in the aftermath when things
were calm. And then my
moment with this that really
stuck with me was when
Ramo said to me, "You
know, they're asking about
you." And I said, "What are they asking?"
He goes, "Yeah, they're asking about
you." And again, I'm not tall but
compared to the people in the village,
I was a little bit taller and had big
shoulders. And he said, "They said you
look like a warrior. Could you come
forward? Show them that you don't
mean any harm. Show them your
palms." And so he pulled me up onto
the beach, right before they left.
I hold up my hands. Listen. And
they sang back. They're singing.
They raised their hands.
I raised my hands.
- Wow.
- And then we were left watching
them walk off the beach
into the jungle with everything
that we'd given them,
and they were gone. And so
we went downriver the next
day and the community said to us, "Okay,
now you understand this is real. This is
terrifying. You felt that fear. You have a
duty, if you're gonna protect this river,
to protect us from them and to help us
figure out what future they want. If they
want to come to us, if they want to learn
farming, if they... whatever it is,
that's fine." But they were like,
"We need protection from you
guys." And then in this video in the
beginning, I'm narrating to
the camera and walking around
right as they're coming up the
beach. But you see this guy,
right there in the blue shirt?
That's George. And he was very friendly,
very confident with this. He said, "Don't be
scared. They're not going to hurt us."
And the next day, we went back to
town—long journey back to town.
We go to sleep, we wake up in the
morning, and we find out
that the following early
morning, our friends in the community
had said, "Okay, the tribe is
gone. We gave them sugarcane,
bananas, and said, 'Please
come back, you're welcome here
anytime.'" And George was driving a boat
with people on board, and as they
were going upriver, 200 of the
tribe ran out, surrounded the boat, and they
started firing arrows. Everybody else hit
the deck and got under the
benches and hid behind
bags of rice. George was driving
as fast as he could, leaning back
while driving. And one arrow came
in just above his scapula and came
out by his belly button. And so
he had that seven-foot arrow tip
through him. They pulled
him out, and I saw the boat
afterward, and there's just horrific
amounts of blood all over the
boat. He had to be medevacked
out, and somehow he lived.
And we were able to help getting
him a helicopter, getting him
evaced, all this. But again, you just go,
"What..." you know, these
people came out of the
jungle and they asked for
bananas. We gave them bananas and
we, in every way possible
said, "We mean peace. We want
friendship with you." And then
the next day, they attacked.
- What do you think happened? Why do
you think their mind turned? Or
maybe this has to do with the role of
violence in their society. Maybe it's so
integrated into how they interact with the
world that they don't even see that as a
fundamental shift in the interaction.
- I don't know. I don't know what to make of it.
And the only thing I can think is that the
way they hid the women from us, you don't know
for them, maybe we're not allowed to see their
women, you know? Because the one
thing that we got was that as George—
George's boat and this other boat
were going upriver, which is how they
live—it's not like they were doing anything
wrong. These people live in a community days
into the Amazon, they were going
fishing. And so they came around
a bend and I think they spooked the
tribe. The tribe might have just acted
defensively and said, "We don't know who this
is." The motors could have set them off, we don't
know. But they shot him. And then the other
thing is the thing with the necklace.
I've asked anthropologists about
this, and their answer was that at
this point they said, "You
know more than we do."
Because two of them had the
exact same item around their
necks, and it seems to be a Brazil nut
and then some sort of casing around the
side, and it looked like animal teeth
positioned in there. And it's like, what are
you carrying? Are you carrying medicine?
Are you carrying some sort of a totem?
But both of them... and it's not a
comfortable thing to wear around your neck—
you know, grapefruit-sized or bigger.
- Do you have a sense if that's a
container or is it just like a totem?
- It seems like a container. If they
didn't let it get wet, they cared
for it. The guy in this picture,
he's got this... this is a piece
of tree fiber that he has it on
him, and then he's gotten his
hands on Brazil nut sacks, plastic
sacks from one of the farms
across the river. And so they just
take, they take. And one of them got a
machete and he was walking. As they were leaving,
again, during that period where they got
friendly, he was leaving and he had the
machete, playing with it and swinging it at
butterflies. And one of my friends,
this guy Bacho, he goes, "Oye, deja mi
machete." He's like, "Drop the machete." And the guy just
looked at him and was like, "Yeah, come and get it."
You know, it's like, "Yeah, you cross
the river and see what happens."
- Do you think he figured out, or they
later figured out, how to use a machete?
- Oh, they know the machete.
- They understand the machete?
- Yeah, they do raids for machetes.
- They understand the power
of sharpened metal.
- It's an Excalibur sword to them. But
yeah, that one has stuck with me
because I wonder, what were
they carrying in there?
- So what are some of the
questions? Like if you could
know everything you'd
want to know about them—
Maybe in the space of communication and
language, that's really interesting.
You mentioned that there's all
kinds of calls, animal calls.
So they obviously know
how to fake animal calls.
- Yeah, they can use animal calls with
enough complexity that they can
do basic commands. They can speak
in Capuchin; they use
Tinamou calls. Some of our
rangers were upriver a few
months ago. This is recently,
they were upriver and they found a
Nomole trail, a Mashco-Piro trail,
and it was Ignacio, of course.
He made a secret whistle
out into the jungle and he's listening,
and they whistle back. So he
and everybody on the team just
ran back to the boat and got out of
there. But at least they answered.
They didn't just shoot. He whistled,
they whistled, and they said, "Out,"
and he got out. But we don't know,
where are the old people? Do
they not survive? What are
the marriage rituals? How
is reproduction handled?
There are one or two
children in the Amazon that
I know of who have washed
downriver on a log and
been rescued by communities
and raised. They either
learn the native dialect or Spanish, and
then, at some point, somebody will go and
ask, "What was it like when you lived with
them?" The answer is always the same:
"I forget." They don't talk about it.
- So maybe we know that they value
secrecy. I mean, when you're
afraid of the outside world,
part of that is confidentiality.
They all sign NDAs.
- Yeah, there are some really good NDAs.
- It's an understood NDA. There are no
lawyers. There's only one
way to execute the law.
- Yeah. It's either a really
strong NDA or that it is
savage living out there in the
jungle, where you're eating
monkeys and turtles and you're
hungry for days on end.
Your wife might get stolen by
another tribe. Your baby might get
stolen—imagine the botflies and the things
that they must put up with.
It's just... I mean, what we
experienced in three days of living
with modern camping gear, headlamps,
and a sense of direction—they're
doing none of that. Put us out there
naked, a very different story.
- Yeah, the brutality of nature—
Werner Herzog comes to mind.
They have to live in that.
But then there's something about the
jungle that serves as a catalyst for
spirituality, so they must also have
a religious component,
a spiritual component
that probably unifies them. There must
be an ideology they operate under.
- Oh, there must be. There's
many things they must have.
They must have a belief system.
They probably have amazing origin
stories. It would be
amazing to know what things
they have accurately and
inaccurately guessed about
us, about the outside world. I
mean, they've never heard of
the country they live in or of World War
II or any of it. And so seeing them come
across the beach was surreal because
it's like this aperture into history.
- By the way, you do have a certain
look, so you realize like—
as I'm speaking to you, your face
is carved in some wood somewhere,
And there's a few of them gathering around
and like still singing about
the great gringo with the—
- The full beard and the big nose. They
probably drew this like, "He's got
hair all over his face and a huge
nose, and they tell their children.
- Yeah. And it could be anything. They—
To the children, they say, "This is
the monster you should be afraid
of," or this could be the most beautiful
encapsulation of the outside
world. It could be everything in
between. You don't get
to control the myths.
- You don't get to control the
myths. Yeah, God only knows, but
- That's so interesting.
- So now, in that 130,000 acres
that we have, we know—and this
is what we sort of have to come out with—
we are now protecting
these people. And the
only way to do that is to make sure
that they're not contacted, let
alone that they don't get
machine guns shot at them by the
narcos, or that crazy hippie
gringos don't go down
there thinking they're going to
join the coolest commune on Earth.
- So how much of the land that they move
about is within the 130,000
acres of rainforest you've been
able to save? And how much of it is not?
How much of it is in the extra 200,000
acres that you're trying to save?
- Most of the rest, most of that 200,000
that we're still trying to protect
is territory that is theirs. And in order-
People always ask me this. They're
like, "How could you buy the
Amazon?" They're like, "That doesn't make
sense." And it's like, well, I have bad
news for you. Somebody already owns it and
we have to buy it from them so that they
don't log it. And so these
landowners are going
to sell their forest to the
logging companies because owning
10,000 acres of the Amazon doesn't
help you if you're a third-generation
jungle man. And now it's just something
that's up there and you live in the city,
and so they're going to contract either the
narcos, the loggers, or the miners to go
out there and use it, and they'll get a
little money. And when those people see
these people, they will kill
them. That's for sure. And
shotguns and machine guns in the end
will win, not to mention the germs.
- So all the money you're trying to raise
and all the land that you're trying to
save, it's all towards that:
protecting the deep jungle.
So when you buy up the jungle,
you just want to let it
be, let the natural ecosystem
come back to life in the cases
when it was logged or just
flourish- ...if it hasn't?
- Again, we're talking about
the last great jungle.
I always called it the last endless
forest because this place is
so incredibly remote. And then the other
question I always get is, "Well, why
is this river so, so important?" And
for my whole career, 20 years
in the Amazon, it's been
that it's massively intact
forest. Places like the ancient
forest where the trees have never
been cut, growing since the dawn of
time. Thousands of species can be
on a single shihuahuaco tree, and
it's Avatar on Earth. You
can see the sweat come off
your skin and rain down and then drink it
out of the river, and you're part of the
chemical physical reality there. It's
one of the last places that's untouched.
This changed everything because
we realized that along with
the butterflies and the monkeys and
the jaguars and the trees and the
ecosystem—there's also
a human culture that
will, in the next few
years, cease to exist, that
will be exterminated if we don't
protect them. And when you look
back at what happened to indigenous cultures
all over the world over the past few centuries,
that they've been wiped
out, we collectively now,
because we know this,
have a chance to undo all
the injustices of the past
by at least doing one
right, by saying these people
want one thing: to just be left
alone. Imagine if we just
protected the river.
And then it's not that they're
this thing that's vanishing from
reality, but they get to continue living
that way. And if they want to come out and
contact us, great, and if they want to continue
living like this for 10,000 years, they
can. And that's what we're
working with now. It's
become so much more important
than just, you know, trying to
protect the environment. It's
like, no, we're trying to protect
things like Yellowstone and
Yosemite and the sequoias that
occur nowhere else on Earth. You
protect the things that are unique and
special, the crown jewels, and in both a
biological way and an anthropocentric way,
this has now become a river with global
historic significance because this story
is going to play out
in the next 18 months.
- You're trying to save
more and more rainforest.
And the mission is clear because
there's just this deep jungle...
...that's full of this incredible life.
And now we know with uncontacted tribes,
there's a lot of interests that don't care
about the jungle they're pushing into...
...and want to cut it down, want to destroy
it. And the mission is pretty clear.
You just want this whole
territory to be preserved.
- Yeah. And that's what makes it so beautiful
is that this is one of those crown jewels.
This is one of those special places on earth
where it's like a time capsule for nature,
for human culture, for biodiversity,
for climate services, for everything.
I think people get overwhelmed when you
say, "We have to save the environment.
We have to save the ocean."
This is one watershed.
It's 300,000 acres, and
we're already at 130,000.
We've shown we can do it. The loggers
are happy to turn into rangers.
People all over the world have
become Junglekeeper supporters.
We have several thousand people
that every month give us
between five and a thousand dollars,
and that keeps the rangers going,
that employs the local people. So it's
not just drawing a line and making a park
and saying, "Everybody stay out."
It's like, no, you have the Nomoles,
you have the indigenous people, you
have a future for the indigenous people
where their kids don't have to worry about
eating monkeys. They can be park rangers.
I get blowback when I say, "People can
even come see it through the treehouse."
People go, "Oh, are you going to bring
tourists into the wildest place on earth?"
And it's like, look at that
jungle. In those 300,000 acres,
if you're talking about a football field,
we're talking about two blades of grass
that we access so people can see
it, which makes a huge difference.
The fact that we can share it with people...
I mean, the amount of people that listen,
look, since the first time I
came here and spoke to you,
the amount to which you've made it
possible for us to protect this place,
the amount of spider monkeys,
jaguars, and giant anteaters,
and those ancient millennium trees that you've
made it possible to protect is monstrous.
- Thank you, brother.
- No, thank you.
- It's been an honor of a lifetime to be
able to watch you. I tell this to people,
there's certain people I'm
glad exist in this world,
because you've educated me and millions
of people about the beauty of the jungle,
and how important the fight
to save the jungle is.
So if you're listening to this, you
absolutely must go. Please donate,
post about it, and share it with
friends: Junglekeepers.org.
You're also doing a gala in New
York at the end of January.
So if you can, please go and
donate to help save the jungle.
- Yes, please do. And because our first
conversation led to the first surge where
people realized what Junglekeepers was—
and because we got this surge of support, we
were able to expand our work, protect more
acres, a lot of our major donors,
a lot of our small scale donors
came in because of that. So these are people
that went, "Wait, if Lex thinks it's a
good idea, then we'll do it." I think based
on your trust they came in. And so...
- I guess also I should
say it's not enough to
speak and communicate the importance
of saving the rainforest. You
actually have to have incredible people
there making it happen. And we have
talked and we'll talk more about the dangers
and the complexities involved on how
to navigate everything.
And one of the things, and
the reason I'm really excited about what
you're doing is I just got to meet the
team, and it brings a smile to my face—
several of the people I know who
are extremely competent. Stefan,
somebody we've talked about— Yes, he likes
to take pictures of stuff but primarily,
the thing he does incredibly well is
run everything, organize everything
to make sure that stuff happens and
happens quickly and efficiently,
all the kind of things that are required
to make stuff like this happen in
the complex environment that
the jungle operates in, the
sometimes lawless environment—
that the jungle operates in. So
the team is incredible, which
is why when you sort of connect the money,
how does the money lead to the solution
of the problem? It's the team
and the team makes it happen.
- I didn't know that people
like Stefan existed.
- Yeah, me neither.
- You know, because I—
- When I met him— He was a
beautiful, wonderful human being.
- I just... I'm, you know, again, I
can use a machete to catch a fish.
But his systems knowledge and
his ability... I mean, his
bandwidth is the size of a
country. It has its own area code.
It's... He's... You know,
just like JJ opened the door
of the Amazon and gave us that local
indigenous perspective. I mean,
yeah, okay, I told some stories about
it, but Stefan came in and went,
"Okay, you guys have good ideas,
but you're both jungle guys."
"You're not helping each other." And running
those systems and making the website
and making it possible to connect the
people that care with the indigenous ranger
program and make sure the rangers have shirts
and cans of tuna and that there's a person
running the ranger team— I mean, these are
things I couldn't dream of organizing.
I can't even organize my... I can't even
make my bed. I can't even get that far.
- Caveman want fish.
- Watching you hunt for fish with a machete
is one of the most awesome things
I've seen. You were literally able to
catch a fish with a machete.
That's what you're good at. And
Stefan is good at everything else.
- Everything else. You remember the meme of
the most interesting man in the world?
Where they say, "He once had an awkward
moment just to see how it felt."
It's like Stefan's to-do list
doesn't exist because it's already
done. It's just incredible.
- Quick pause. Bathroom break.
- Oh, 100%. Yes, sir.
- And we're back. One thing I forgot
to ask you is about the diet
of the uncontacted tribes. You mentioned
potentially monkeys and turtles,
maybe eggs? So, what do we know about
what they eat? What's the source of
protein? Do they eat monkeys?
- Their primary sources of food would be
monkeys, turtles, turtle
eggs, and small game
like paca, the large rodent
that's the size of a beagle.
Capybaras. Stuff they can
shoot. They don't really fish.
And we know these things because
our indigenous trackers and
rangers find their camps.
They'll find some of those little thatch
structures they make on the beaches,
and we see the bones. There'll be
tapir bones, there'll be turtle
shells, which seem like
their closest thing to a
bowl. The day that we
interacted with them,
they did find a bowl. We saw them
walking away with it in one of
the farms, and then days later
we found it destroyed. So they
didn't seem like they saw
much utility in the bowl.
- A temporary container.
- It's temporary. They make a fire.
They must be amazing at making fire.
I don't know how they do it out there.
- It's very difficult
because everything is wet.
- I don't know how they do it. And
I'm a really good firestarter.
- And it's tough in the jungle.
- It's almost impossible most of the year
because everything is wet to its core.
- So you think they cook the meat?
- They have to be cooking their
meat from a parasite standpoint,
...everything. We know that—
...they're cooking their meat. We
see it. You know, there's not a lot
of excess berries. Things
like berries and nuts and
fruits, that the monkeys
and the birds are—
...and the bats are getting to those first.
I mean, that's what fruit does, right?
A tomato is green until
its seeds are mature,
then it turns red to advertise,
"Eat me," so that you eat it and
your gut transports that somewhere
else. It gets free transportation.
In the jungle, that happens so quick
that we're never getting produce.
- In the book, you have a picture of
a native girl on the Los Piedras...
...having monkey for lunch.
- Yes.
- It looks really strange when you
have— The monkey kind of looks—
It looks a little bit like cannibalism
because it looks like a small human.
I don't know what it is about
monkeys. There's a human—
...element to them. In their eyes, in
their form factor, but even in the
warmth they bring to the interaction.
- Yeah, I was babysitting her. She
was six at the time, Dira, and
her parents went out and we were left at
camp. They said, "Keep an eye on her.
Make sure nothing eats her." She
was like, "Hey, I want lunch."
I said, "Great, what is there?" And
she pulls out this monkey head.
She was like, "It's ready," and
she starts pulling at the ear.
She's like, "Can you help me?" So I
pulled off the ear with my teeth—
...and then I gave it to her. We just
shared this monkey head back and forth.
We're sitting there and I took a few
pictures of her as she's eating.
I have this video where I go, "What's
your favorite food?" She said, "Monkey."
I said, "Not cake?" And
she was like, "Monkey."
She was pulling its lips
off and, like you said—
...you see the teeth and the eyes.
It's sort of grilled in static agony.
It looks like a tortured human,
and she was just enjoying it.
- Let me look it up on Perplexity.
How many people in the world eat—
monkey? Does it taste good?
- If it were prepared right, it would taste
good, but they just throw it over the fire.
And even if you took a perfectly good chicken
and did that, it wouldn't taste great.
- There's no reliable global count of
how many people eat monkey meat,
but available data suggests many millions
regularly or occasionally consume
primate bushmeat—
...especially in parts of Africa, Latin
America and Asia. I mean, she looks
like that is her favorite meal— is monkey.
- Yeah, we had a great time.
- Who are we to judge?
- Who are we to judge? I mean, have a tuna
sandwich or a monkey face, whatever.
- She's loving it. That's awesome.
That's a good picture there.
- And she's adorable.
- Yeah. Now that some time has
passed, when you look back at
that encounter, which I
really do think is historic,
with the uncontacted tribe, what do you
think about? What lingers with you?
- Honestly, I'm still processing it. I'll
still find myself just staring off, sort of
remembering it or looking at
the footage. But it felt like
the voice of the jungle was
speaking. You know, these
people are... there's that separation
between humans and nature where we go,
"We have to protect nature." You know?
It's like explaining what water is to
a fish. We're part of it. We depend
on it. And these are people that
depend on it 100%. And as we sit
here surrounded by technology,
concrete and civilization, they're
still out there right now. And the
fact that we've been trying to
protect their home without even
really knowing that they were in
it because they're so elusive,
it gives you perspective on where we
came from and how far we've come.
You know, I look at simple
things. You board an
airplane or you take a picture
and you go, "This is a miracle."
And I think having that perspective of
having interacted with them where you
go, "How much work does
it take to make this?"
If you and I were standing in the jungle
and somebody said, "You have to make this,"
how many years before we
came up with this? How
many rubber trees, and where would we get
the metal, and what would we use as dye?
How do we make the spring mechanism
and figure out how to make it rotate?
I don't know. And it's like they are
working with the bare essentials.
And so it's an interesting reference point
to start at in terms of how incredibly
at in terms of how incredibly
privileged we are. You know,
the other thing is we have
written text—so many different types
of text. We have code, and we have
language, and we have music, and we can
communicate in all these different ways.
And they have spoken word. They have oral
tradition, and that's it. And so they're
operating the way our
ancestors did through the
power of what operated and
is persisting in modern
And so I think, for me, I
come back to the world and
it moves very fast when I see
it because I'm still stuck on,
you know, whether or not me and
you can drink out of that puddle.
Thinking about that.
- The big questions of life.
- Yeah. I mean, you're right from the
perspective of the uncontacted tribe.
Going from the technological
world to the jungle, you realize
the majesty, the magic of
the biological system that
is the jungle, that is
nature. But from their
perspective, also there is
a majesty and magic to the
technological world. The human-created
technological world of
the pen and the computer,
and the light bulb, that too
is magical. So sometimes we
- Absolutely
- don't give enough credit to both:
the magic of the technological world, all
the incredible things humans have been
able to build, and the
magic of the natural world.
- I mean, what we've been able to achieve,
I think you and I and people that spend
large amounts of time in the wilderness,
especially somewhere as remote and fundamental
as the Western Amazon, have
a different perspective
on it. Because I think that when
you're born in it, you don't
necessarily have the framework to
appreciate how far we've come.
You go, "Yeah, I got on the train
today. I checked my phone. I FaceTimed
my mom," and you're like, "This is
all normal." And it's like we found
a way to take
things out of the ground and mix them
together into magic devices that can do
anything. And it's mind-blowing.
- There's a deep optimism to that. You write in
the book, which I really like, I think somewhere
in the beginning, quote, "Given
all the death and destruction I've
witnessed, it would be easy to
slip into the popular anti-human
narrative that we are
a plague on the planet
and there's nothing that can be done, but
my career in conservation has given me a
glimpse into an alternate
narrative. I've met people who are
proving more and more that
something can be done.
I'm talking about real heroes, people who
have dedicated their lives to redeeming
the evil that is capable of
being waged by the human
soul, people who are guarding
the flame amidst the
storm, proving every day what so many have
forgotten. There is still hope." And that
speaks against the cynicism and apathy,
and the view that humans are
a destructive force in the
world. That speaks to the fact that
humans, with all the technological
elements that we have created,
can actually do a lot of
good. I wrote in my notes here a quote
from the great Jane Goodall: "The
greatest danger to our
future is apathy." So
caring about the world, having optimism
for the world, having a hope for the
world is the way to help have an impact,
help save it. But on that, I have
to ask you about Jane. She
passed away on October
1st. Some humans in this
human civilization of
ours can open our eyes
to the beauty of the
world, and she is one of the best of them.
And she's had an impact on your life.
Maybe can you speak to the
impact that she's had?
- I mean, when I grew up,
you know, my parents...
Being dyslexic, I couldn't read for
a very long time. And so my parents
read to us every night, which
was amazing considering
how hard they were working. But they'd find the
time to give us an hour of reading every night,
whether it was Lord of the Rings or
Sherlock Holmes or Jane Goodall. And
so I grew up with Jane
being this figurehead of
conservation and of adventure
and sort of a living
historical figure, this
legendary person. And so then
one time, right around the time that
I'd been going to the jungle for a few
years, I got to go see Jane
speak, I think it was at
NYU. And, you know, sitting in the crowd,
watched her, completely amazed.
And I had, at the time, my
cousins had been telling me that I should write
down my stories, the stories of taking care of an
anteater and stories of catching anacondas.
And they're like, "Write, you know?
These are such good stories." And so
I'd been writing them down and I just
remember after the talk, she did
at least an hour on stage and then
hundreds of people lined up, and
she sat there and each of
those people wants a moment
with this legend. And so she has to take a
picture, shake their hand, they say, "You mean so
much to me." She says, "Thank you." And then
they move on and they say, "We'll send you
the picture." "Okay, great." So then I got
my moment and we waited in line and I gave
her this manila envelope with two
chapters in it. And one chapter
was "Lulu the Giant Anteater" for Mother
of God, and the other chapter was me,
JJ and Pico out on the river catching
anacondas, and just talking about how
amazing the jungle was. And I said, "I'd
love it if you could endorse my book that
doesn't exist yet." And I felt like
such a loser doing that. And I felt so
stupid because I feel like everyone was
probably asking something of her, and I,
you know, it's incredibly draining
to talk to that many people, even if
it is for a good reason. And
48 hours later, she got back
and she said, "You know, this
is incredible. I would love
to write a recommendation for
your book as soon as you find a
publisher." And what
happened with that is that
Jane—the way I think of it
is, you know, she waved her
very powerful magical wand in
my direction, and she had the
incredible compassion and presence to
actually—I mean, after talking to that many
people and being on the road 300 days a year
and being Jane Goodall, this living
legend scientist, to actually
do something so mundane as look
at some kid's writing. And
of course, when I went to publishers, they
said, "Jane who? Who said that they would
endorse your book?" Because
everyone had said no. Every
publisher in New York had already said no.
And then after that, HarperCollins took
me on and they said, "Well, if Jane Goodall thinks
it's a good idea, then we think it's a good
idea." And it became Mother of God and
then because of that, Jungle Keepers,
Dax, everything else stemmed
from that. So had Jane
not been the legend that she
is truly in every moment,
my whole career would never have happened,
which also means that those thousands
of heartbeats and thousands of acres in the
Amazon wouldn't be protected because we
never would've started Jungle Keepers.
- And she did that not because you're
special; she did that to everybody.
And now just imagine the scale, the
impact she's had because of that.
And guess what? You have a bit
of that responsibility now as
well. There's young people that
walk up to you in that way,
and you have that responsibility
of seeing them, of giving them a
chance, of seeing the potential in every
single human being that walks up to you.
- It definitely... I would say that
with Jane, we could do four hours
on just Jane: what she did for
humanity, for science, for
women, for wildlife, the amount
of other people that she
inspired and gave careers to,
everything she did for me.
But to me, that presence of
mind when you reach that level, to not be
worried about your own travel and your own
schedule and busy with getting
some rest—and that she actually
looked at it—has informed
how I operate. And
indeed like you say, at this point,
as strange as it is, people will
stop me on the street and say,
"Hey, I watch your videos every
night with my kids." Or someone
will say, "How do I get your
job? I've been watching you for years
and I'd love to help conservation."
So it's made it so that I
follow her example where
it's like you stop what
you're doing and you
pay attention. Because you don't know, that
might be the next kid that's out there saving
a river, or the next person that makes an
innovation that makes it possible to clean rivers,
or whatever it is,
whatever their dream is.
Jane was in the hope business.
She always said it: you know,
that not losing hope was key to
staying in the fight. And
that we live at a time when,
apathy is a poison peddled
by the darkness. It's—
they're trying to make you feel
disoriented, apathetic, and
scared. And fighting back
against that and having
conviction and passion and fire and hope
are the only way that we're gonna fight that. She
understood that and spent her whole life spreading
it, guarding the flame
against the storm, and
tipping her candle to others to light
them. I mean, that was her whole thing.
- What advice would you give to young people
on how to do that? Those young Pauls sitting
there—and your life story
is just incredible in that
way. You've taken a leap into adventure,
into the unknown. What would
you recommend they do?
- I think the thing that I
try to communicate to them—
and again, my inbox is filled with people.
"I'm from Finland. I'm from Spain.
I'm from Georgia." People saying, "How
do I get your job? How do I get out
there and do it?" And it
really is just that: you
throw yourself headfirst into
adventure. You just do it.
I remember hearing people say,
"You know, if I can do it,
you can do it." And I remember how hollow that
sounds 'cause I'm like, "Yeah, you're on a
talk show or you just wrote a
book..." You know, these titans
of their industries and innovators
saying, "Oh, if I can do it,
anybody can do it." But now that
we're protecting all this rainforest,
and that I've lived with
the animals and met
the tribes, and it's becoming
this global movement.
You know, I didn't have a PhD.
There's that quote that someone
less qualified than you is living
your dream life and has your dream
job right now, and I am the poster
child for that because I went there
when I failed out of high school and
started taking unmatriculated college
classes and going to the jungle with my
friend JJ and just doing it for the sheer
love of it for years,
almost a decade before
anything surfaced. And the
other thing is there's not
even a path. There was no path
ahead of us. There was no,
"Okay, you go to school. You get trained in this,
and you're gonna become a this." I went there and it
was like, "You're never gonna be a conservation
biologist 'cause you don't have the grades.
You don't have a PhD. You don't
have family money. You're not
gonna be able to protect rainforests."
So I said, "All right, well then,
selfishly, I just wanna see it." And
then I ended up getting trained by the
indigenous people, and
like what happens so many
times—you could use a restaurant
example as the best one,
where you might start washing
dishes, but at least you're in the
restaurant, you know? And then at some
point, the manager's gonna need you to help
with restocking and so on.
And after a few years, you're
gonna be helping the new guy, and after
a few years you might end up being
the manager, and at some point you might
end up starting your own restaurant.
That's the only way to do that. You
can't just search it on a computer.
You have to go sweat and bleed and do it.
- And that said, especially if you
fall in love with the journey,
the path you take is full of
difficult periods. I think you
said somewhere this just
seems to be the nature of it.
That there's going to be pain and
suffering along the way. You have
a really nice post...
...that I recommend people watch
about just this. When people ask for
advice: that the hardship, the suffering—
—and I've seen how much you
care. When I've seen you,
just in your face, when you see a tree
being cut down or you see the fires,
there's real pain there in
your heart and you have to
carry that. And so the
post is, "How honest can
I be? What do I tell these
kids who message me asking how
they can do what I do? It's not
David versus Goliath. There's
no sword or sling that can hold back
a dragon this big. You're going
against the current of global
economic entropy and human apathy.
Swimming against the current
is tiring, a great way to
drown. Every day we don't win, we lose,
and when we do, worlds burn. The more you
know, the more it bleeds. The
heartbeats all stop when the flames
come through. Constellations
of species turn to
ghosts, and we're the only
ones saving them. Cupped
our hands around a candle
in the howling darkness."
And people want to be inspired.
Keep that social media going,
keep it up. You're doing
great. They want to know we're
winning, and we've done a lot
of winning, but not right
now. We're getting slaughtered.
We're at that part of the
story. We're almost at the
end game. We can think
positively, as positively
as we want. Thoughts and
prayers won't stop a chainsaw,
and the motor that's carrying us
against the current towards the
miraculous goal only works when there's
gasoline in it. As soon as that stops,
we drown. We drown. We can take the
warm light from all of those
who help and not let it bother
us that there are people who could buy
a planet, claiming to care. At some
point you realize what's
really happening."
"As a kid you'd rather be
Aragorn. You don't want to
actually carry the ring, not when
you learn what it's going to
cost, even if you make
it. How can you explain
to Sam why you can't get
on the boats? Whatever it
takes, whatever it takes.
It's that time of year
again. Here come the flames.
Whatever it takes, it's
coming." And people should watch the
video that goes along with this. But that
speaks to the pain, the difficulty,
the challenge, the suffering involved—
when you're faced with the possibility of
destruction. And that's the other side of
the sword of caring for something deeply.
- Yeah, we've watched a lot of
forest burn. We've pulled a lot of
animals out of the flames.
Yeah, I wrote that at a
time where we were just getting
hammered. Funding wasn't
coming in. There were miners. It was
just months and months out in the jungle
alone, and yeah, that— it's
a Thom Yorke track that I'd just been
listening to again and again, and it was so
low. There was then a huge
new invasion where they just—
burned the whole side of the river. And
you know, it's never going to come back.
And it's part of the forest that I loved,
and I knew the animals there and it's,
it's gone. And so we have
to live through that on a
weekly basis, at least
a day-to-day basis. And
when you take on responsibility
for something like this, you—
you go to sleep thinking,
"If we don't do it then worlds burn. If
we don't save it, then..." Every time you
said the sadness that surrounds
a happy moment— well, it's
like, how am I supposed to go to a
party and talk with people about
anything, or how am I supposed
to go to sleep when if we don't
succeed at what we're trying to do,
if we don't outrace the chainsaws and
the roads, then those trees die,
those millennium trees, and
we're the only ones out there protecting
them. When you see that black scorched
earth with nothing left, it's just ashes
on the ground and the cacophony of life is
silenced, and it's just this horrible,
violent silence. It makes you sick. And so,
yeah, there's a lot of weight
that comes with that where
we're not theoretically doing
something. We're black and
white, practically doing it.
- So that's the other side of
the advice to young people.
- Oh, yeah.
- It's not gonna be easy.
- No. When they say, "How do I get
your job?" it's like, "Well, you
don't want my job. You don't want the botflies,
and you don't want the dengue, and you
don't want—don't even
inquire what a normal life
looks like." I lived out
of a backpack for 20
years. You know how many monkey
faces I had to eat because
there was no other food? Like, seriously.
Just that shot, being alone on
the boat in the river and how
many days the motor didn't work. And you sleep
out there, and you get rained on because
you don't have any protection, and you have
some leaves over your face. And then you go
home, and everyone's got a job, and everyone's
got kids, and everyone's happy. And they're like,
"What are you doing down there?"
"I'm trying to save the rainforest."
They're like, "Sure." And now
we're at this point where,
I've cared a whole lot for a long
time. We've had rises, and then
we've had falls, and we've had wins, and then
we've had failures. And the last few years,
we've had this rolling
success of people finding out
about our work and coming in. And we start
to go, "Wow, if we protected 130,000 acres,
we might actually be able to do
this." And so, there's that moment in
300 where they show Leonidas, and they
say, "Even the king allows himself
a moment of hope that this might be
okay," right before they get slaughtered.
And someone very dear to me
recently said, "In celebration
of where we've gotten to, that if it happened
in any harder of a way, it would have
actually killed you. And if it
had happened in an easier way, it
wouldn't have been so divine."
And that slapped me in the face because
it was like, "Man, it has been so
hard, but look where we are.
We might actually do this."
- It just has to be that way. Speaking of
which, another complexity in all of this,
you write about in the
afterword of the book,
about the narco-traffickers that have
moved into the river basin. They are not
the loggers that we've spoken
about anymore. They're
growing coca for cocaine, and
they're building airstrips. So
tell me how this came to be.
- Like you said, the loggers... our
whole life on this river, when
loggers come in, JJ and I would walk
up to them and say, "Hey, what's up?"
Sit down with them and have a
beer or share a meal and talk to
them and ask who their father was and if we
know them and then hire them. And they're
friendly.
- They are, in a way, brothers,
JJ. They're the same.
- They come from the same people. They're
simple local people. They're not evil.
They're just people who usually have a
kid and a wife, and they're looking for
work. And so they work with the
chainsaw because that's what they
know. And they work for, you know, $30
a day, if that, in very challenging,
harsh environments. And so when we see
clearings, I would always go with the drone
and fly it over clearings. We'd get some
intel, and then we'd go bring that to the
police. And the police, you know...
Jungle Keepers supports the
police at this point because the Peruvian
government has a hard time
with resources, trying to
manage Amazonia. And when
you're three days from
civilization, getting cops out there is not
the easiest thing. So sometimes we'll lend
boats or gasoline or logistical support.
There was a moment in March, several hours
upriver from, you know, home
base. And I'm with JJ on
the boat, and I fly the drone, and there's this
big new clearing, and I flew the drone over, and
we lower the drone. And a few times, I've had
people come out and wave at the drone or say
like, "Get away." And
we're out in the middle of the river just sort
of idling, staying in one place, and I lower the
drone. And I see the, these little huts, and
we're saying, "Okay, this is a big clearing."
I'm snapping images, snapping images. There
are people on the boat with us, these
visitors who had flown
in, and I have my local
team, and all of a sudden,
people come running out of the
houses. And they run straight to their
boats, and we're already above where
their boat is. So home is in
downriver direction. They get in
their boats and start chasing us,
and we start driving, and we're
going at full speed. We have a 60
horsepower. They had a 40, and we're
driving up these... We're just
doing this chase now, and
our guests, who are gonna
be potential funders. At one point, the
father looked at me, and he goes, "Hey, this
whole running from the Pirates of the Caribbean
thing," he's like, "It's getting scary.
You're scaring us." He
was like, "Can we..."
I'm like, "What are we doing?" He goes, "When
are you gonna put the drone down?" And I go,
"I'm flying the drone at full speed to keep up
with the boat." And I just crash-landed the drone
on the side of the river near a big tree. I
just said, "Forget it. We'll get it later."
And I was like, "Fine. This happens
all the time." "They get mad. They
chase us. It's no big deal." And I smiled
at him, and JJ's smiling. He goes, "This is
so bad."
And he's smiling. And JJ looked at me, and
the smile fell off him like a mask, and he
looked at me, and he was like, "This is
not good." And we kept going upriver
and luckily, there was a camp of
police that we've worked with quite a
bit. And I went to a friend of mine, and
I remember we got off the boat. I shook his hand. He
said, "What's going on?" I said, "Look downriver, and
there's a boat tearing upriver towards
us." And he did three things. He
got the rest of the guys, they armed up,
they got on the boat with guns. They
put ski masks on. They got ready for
combat. They told us to get down. He also
said, "Hey, turn on the
sat-link. Call for support back
home." We turned our boat
around. And as soon as the
narcos, which we didn't
even realize were narcos
chasing us. We thought we
were looking at loggers.
When they saw the guns and they saw us face them,
they turned their boat around, and they went back
downriver. So we got
escorted downriver, and I
remember shaking his hand, my
friend, and saying, "Thank you
for saving us today." And telling
the other guys they did a good
job. I said, "Get back upriver." We'd been
brought home safe. This is hours later.
I said, "Good job. Thank
you so much." And they went
and then that night, I'm sitting
at the station that you know.
know. And I get a phone
call from Stefan. And he
He goes, "Pick up the phone." I go,
"I'm in the middle of a conversation."
He goes, "Pick up the phone." And my
friend, whose hand I had just shaken,
they went back upriver, and as they were unloading
their boat and washing off in the stream,
the narcos did a drive-by and
shotgun straight to the chest,
shot him in the chest. And
so all of that enthusiasm,
and "We're protecting the
biodiversity" and "This is so great,"
there's people from around the world...
it's like that scene in the movie
where there's a montage of success and
hope and acres and winning—gunshot.
And I could still feel his hand in my
hand. I just shook his hand. I said, "No."
I said, "Well, is he okay?" He said, "He
took a shotgun straight to the chest."
And they're like, "He's
dead." I said, "Okay."
And so I had to go out to dinner
and not show the guests anything,
and just smile and laugh and talk to
them about whatever and keep that in,
which felt very, very difficult to do.
And so what happened, as you said, the threat
level escalated and we didn't know it.
The narcos had come in and started realizing
that there's so much wilderness here
that they can operate and there's no
police. And then when we flew the drone,
they got mad. So we realized this.
We communicated with the police and
they said, "Oh yeah, these are narcos."
Now we realize this is part
of the serious drug mafia.
And then I had gone back—with the incident
you're referring to at the end of the book,
I had gone back to New York, again, to speak to
donors to try and get this work to continue.
You know how it works. We're at the station,
then you go to that little logging town,
and then there's a road. And so our
pickup truck had come in on the road,
and JJ was supposed to come down, get in
the truck and drive back to the city.
JJ was on the river and went, "I forgot I
was supposed to get more stuff at the city."
He goes, "You know, I'll go tomorrow." He
went back up and sent the boat driver down,
and told our driver, Percy, who was waiting
with the pickup truck, "JJ's not coming today."
"Go back and come back tomorrow."
Percy starts driving down the road
and he sees a tree across the road.
This is a single-lane road through the
jungle; there's nowhere else you can go,
and men with guns come and stick the
pistols in through the open windows,
gun against his head. They pull
him out and they go, "Where's JJ?"
And "¿Donde está el gringo volador?"
They said, "Where's that shithead gringo
that flew the drone?" And if either
of us had been in the car that day,
if either of us had been in the car
that day, they would have killed
they took his phone, our driver Percy's.
Thank God, they didn't hurt him,
driver, Percy. They, thank
God, they didn't hurt
but they sent a message to us.
They said, "Let them know."
They said, "We missed you this time, but we'll
get you next time. We're gonna get you."
And so when JJ called me, he
was howling. He just had that
adrenaline and that emotion
of that it almost happened.
And so that was... that changed
everything. And so since then we've
been, you know, it's not counting
butterflies and taking ecological
surveys, it's that there's a
drug war being fought on our
river. And now when these
roads come in, we can't just
go out and meet these people anymore
and talk to them, 'cause they are
actively looking to shoot us.
They know our names, and then...
as if all these other things weren't enough
indication, the police intercepted a
phone from someone they arrested, and
on the phone, in the WhatsApp chat, it
said, "If you see JJ or the gringo,
anyone in our network, please
kill them. You'll be rewarded."
So we both have a hit out on us
and life on the river has changed.
At the moment, we don't...
we can't... I can't just go out
walking around, swimming and
driving my boat. You have
to be looking over your
shoulder at all times. You can get
as trained as you want with a pistol
and sleep with it under your
pillow, but the way these
people work, they'll catch you when you're least
expecting it. They'll wait till you're at a cafe in
town. They'll wait till your motor doesn't
work on the side of the river. It'll just be a
quick one and they'll go.
And so that feeling, on
top of the weight of- of
protecting the ecosystem and
the animals, and the race to tell people
about it and do all this, it's like
now we're actively being
hunted when we're there.
- And this is very directed at you and JJ?
So they really don't care about
the others. They understand.
Are you afraid? What's it
been like living with this,
with the real fear of being
murdered at any moment?
- I wish I could say I handled it
better than I've been handling it.
I wonder how people in war zones do it.
I wonder how some of my soldier friends that I
have immense respect for did it when they were
deployed, 'cause for me,
once this happened, it was,
every phone call now I think,
"Did something happen to JJ?"
Every time I go to sleep, my dreams
are that I'm being shot. And
it really threw me. It really
affected me. When JJ called me, the
way he was just shouting... I don't even
remember what he was saying. He was just
shouting, "They almost got us!
They almost got us!" He was so,
terrified and angry and,
so yeah, it's... There was a day
not long ago that I was swimming
in the river. And I was just in the river,
you know, right in front of the stairs
at the station, and a boat came
around the bend. And I remember
thinking, "Do I run? Do I go
underwater? Do I hide? What the
hell do I do?" I didn't have a gun near me.
The security people were up the stairs.
You go, "Holy shit." And it's not the
danger of, "if I jump on an anaconda, it
might kill me," or "if I climb this, I
might fall." These are people who want
to kill you. And on top of it, you have
the, you know... When you see
what your friend looks like after
three days of floating in a river, what a
body looks like of a person you used to
know, that's very viscerally terrifying
because there's the tragedy of
that, that person lost his life,
who was younger than I was. He
was a kid. He was in his 20s.
And it's just very hard,
it's very hard to do
anything because... I mean, like
right now, my hands are sweating.
It affects me. And even in the daylight,
if I can go, "You know, it's fine. This is
part of the thing," you know? This is the adventure,
people deal with this all over the world.
You can talk yourself tough
and then, in those quiet
moments, you wake up at 4:00 AM
and you go, "Fuck." You know,
"Why am I sweating? Why did I just have
those dreams? Why is my heart racing?"
It sinks its way into your subconscious
and it's just not what we signed up for.
We wanted to just protect this
beautiful place and this is this whole
new threat. We're not trained
for this. We're not a
police or military force and it's like
we've now seen violence on a scale that
we were very unprepared for.
And so, just two days ago, I
was on my way to you and my phone rang
at nine o'clock at night and it was JJ.
And my heart was jackhammering.
I had to pull over
because I was going, "What news
now?" You know? "Did we lose another
bunch of acres? Is it a new road? Did
somebody die?" It really scatters you.
- In some sense, it's a twist that
you didn't ask for and it doesn't
necessarily have anything to do with
the fight you're fighting, which is
protecting the rainforest.
But because of it being
pristine and quiet and away from
civilization, it also becomes a place where,
you can have airstrips.
It becomes lawless in a
certain way because it's so
far away from civilization.
- Yeah. It's the only place that
they can operate with impunity.
There's no police out there. And
so they saw us helping the police
and they went, "Cut the head off the snake."
And, you know, Chico Mendes, Dorothy
Stang—the list of environmental
defenders that are assassinated in the
Amazon every year is huge.
There are endless examples of it.
It's staggering. I forget the
exact numbers, but every
year we lose local
leaders who are trying to stop an oil
company or a drug cartel, and they
just shoot them because they know
that one person who's able to rally
that support, who has that
voice, if you just shoot
them, usually it ends the thing
and then they can go back to
doing whatever the hell they
want. And so right now,
we're working very closely with
the Peruvian government. People
assume that, you know, a Latin
American government is automatically
corrupt, but we found that these
are really good people that want to
help their citizens. And the
police have been working very
hard to stop the narcos, to
protect the local indigenous
people because with the narcos comes
human trafficking. With a team
of male narcos that are
out in the woods making
drugs, they want prostitutes. And how
do they get prostitutes? They go steal
girls from indigenous communities
that don't know any better.
Then there's reports that the narcos
have made contact with the uncontacted
tribes. And of course, they're gonna shoot
machine guns at them. They're not gonna have a
shotgun where it's a fair fight. They're gonna
mow them down and the uncontacted tribes are
gonna have no idea. That's
why I posted a video
of me in the rain saying, "This is
endgame," because there was a new
road that was coming off
the north of our territory
above the ancient forest. They had jumped over
'cause we stopped it at the ancient forest.
They've gone above the ancient forest.
Now, they're trying to cut down to a new
area. And so it looks like this,
like that. ...Trans-Amazon...
Stefan made this map, of course. But
you see the area that we're trying to
protect loosely, so that we
don't give away anything...
Loosely, the area that we are protecting.
So, the light green is the 130,000 acres—
...and then this metastasizing network of
roads just reaching out and trying to get
in. And so they're trying to come in
from the north where that arrow is,
they're trying to come down. And so the
police are fighting them along this—
...and it's a full-on drug
war right now. And so,
stopping that, securing this northern
boundary. And again, just the
power of what we have. When I posted
this, I asked Stefan to make,
show people the road and
where it's going to go.
We posted this video and said, "We have to
protect this 100,000 acres right now." And
all up here is uncontacted
tribe territory.
And just from that one post, we got
$150,000 in 48 hours and we bought this
concession. We stopped that
road. But now they're up here—
...and they're trying to come
down. And this is the thing: it's
great. Yes, you get to be an adventurer
and live in the jungle, sure.
But it's like this Mission:
Impossible thing where
you might get lucky enough to pull off your
psychotic mission. You know, jump your
motorcycle off the train and parachute
down and stop the bomb before it goes
off. Great. How many of those do you get?
And we're having to do it every month.
These amazing people
that are supporting the rangers allow us to patrol
and protect this because once we have this land
protected, the interesting thing is
that the police can go into any of the
light green areas. If anybody's
there, just arrest them.
They're on Junglekeepers' land, they're
out. And eventually that land will
become national park if we're successful.
The problem with the land that's
not is it's a gray area. It's the
middle of the Amazon, are they
allowed to be here? Do they really have
cocaine? Because they'll plant papaya
for acres and a little bit of cocaine
behind it. You know, they'll put the
sacks... They're sneaky. And so they have
to build a case, and it takes time, and
then the road comes in... You know, and in
that time, they'll knock off a police officer.
And it's like if we were just able
to get this tomorrow, the whole
problem gets solved. We could
give the police two more
boats, and then they could do
all the patrolling they need.
- So the mission is clear.
- The mission is very clear. The problem is
that right now we've been playing defense
and sustaining losses. And either we need
to inspire enough people that the donor
program goes through the roof, and
instead of having several thousand
donors, we have, you know, 50,000 donors
and we will raise... We
need $20 million to save
the rest of the corridor. We'd raise $20
million overnight with enough people. Or
we need one of these people that
has the resources to come in like
Batman and just go, "I want
the park named after me
and I'm just gonna come in and give you the
$20 million." And then we do it tomorrow,
and then we make a documentary about how we
saved a river and the tribe and the monkeys and
the... But right now, we're...
you know, begging on the side of
the road for enough change to buy
bullets so that we can stay alive.
- So these narcos, they're...
There's a kind of distributed
network where a bunch of them are
pretending to be farmers. So they're
holding onto the land and then maybe
they start planting cocaine on the land-
...slowly, and they build the airstrips.
Are they trying to stay under the canopy
with the airstrip?
- It's brilliant. First what they do is they
subsidize the poorest people and they say,
"Go up this river, turn left at the tree
and just start there." And they're like, "Here's
a few grand." And these people are like, "I
never had a few grand before." They're like,
"Buy gasoline. Here's a chainsaw. Go clear some
land." They send these people up there,
and then when they show up a year later
and these people have made an illegal farm out
in the jungle, they go, "Hey, we need a safe
house. Remember that time we gave you
gasoline and now you live here? You're gonna
work for us now." And so they're kind
of a friend of the people like that,
and they have safe houses all over the
jungle. And then when the bosses come to
collect what they're growing out
there... I mean, the police busted
a narco operation that was
in the middle of the jungle.
I mean, hiking to the ancient forest
days into the jungle. These people are
going on foot with sacks and stuff.
And the way they do their airstrips is
you think the canopy of the rainforest
is 150 or 160 feet tall. And if you
clear the interior of the landing
strip, the trees are still meeting
overhead. And so you can't
fly over and see down—
...which is the same reason we didn't know about
the road that was going to the ancient forest,
because overhead the trees are meeting, so
you're not going to see it on satellite
and you're not going to see it from a plane. And
these bush pilots fly in and they'll just duck
in under the canopy, land their
plane, load up, and then they fly
out. I mean, expert pilots.
- So it's impossible to detect.
- It's almost impossible to detect.
We're working with people now. You
know, it's this arms race. They've
been going okay. There are drone
programs. I talked to someone that
has a different type of drone, a
16-foot drone that uses the
thermals to climb up and has solar panels on
the wings and flies for two weeks at a time.
It's like a glider-
...that recharges itself. And it'll
keep constant imagery, so we'll get
almost up-to-the-moment data on
disturbances in the canopy. And it's like,
well, that'll be a first-hand
alert system, but then we've gotta
get the police out there which,
as you know, is a two-day
expedition by boat, and
it's the only way. And
so the local police force there
may be dedicated, but putting
people on a multi-day expedition to go get
shot at in the jungle is nobody's idea of a
good time.
- Have you researched into
this whole other world of
Drug trafficking, cocaine
trafficking? How big is the
operation? Looking at Perplexity—
...a multi-thousand ton,
multi-billion dollar global industry?
- I mean, globally it's a monster.
- Colombia, Peru, Bolivia. And they move
north and east through the Americas, the
Caribbean, and the Atlantic to reach
major consumer markets. This is a machine
fueled by a lot of money
and a lot of brutality.
Number of cocaine users worldwide
is about 25 million people.
- Users.
- Users. So there's a market.
And when there's a market,
you're going to find the way.
Quick pause. Bathroom break.
All right, and we're back.
Me, as somebody who is afraid of heights,
and I've had a chance to interact
with you a bunch, you're in
some sense fearless and I've
watched you climb a lot
of trees. You've helped me
climb a tree. And there's this
wonderful part of the book where you
talk about finding the tallest tree
in the forest you knew at the time,
and that was something that you
passed and thought was impossible to
climb. And you talk about climbing it.
You take us through the experience of
that. And that leads you to seeing the
Mist River in the rainforest
as the sun rises. I was
wondering if you could talk
through the story of that,
both for me, but even for
you at that time, the
terrifying process of climbing a tree like
that for the first time
with J.J. at the bottom
cheering you on, and what it
felt like to see the Mist River.
- That tree, you've met that
tree. She's a good one. Her
base is at least as big as this
room, and she's probably about
160-something feet tall. And
so when you're looking at
these giant buttress roots going
up, which I'd been doing for 18
years at that point, I always said,
"Man, if I could just climb it."
I'd never had the rope skills, and
I'd developed as a rock climber.
I was working on strength, and I
trained for it. It's like most things.
You can't just do it. I'd
climb up 30 feet and go, "No
way." The trunk of the tree goes vertical
for about 70 feet before branches even
come out, so there's just this one
big vine. And J.J. and I did it at,
I want to say like 4:00 AM,
really early. The howler monkeys
had just started. And you start
climbing with the rope up this vine,
and you have to... It's not technical.
It's a strength climb. You gorilla up
this vine, and it's all back
strength. And so I did it no shirt,
no shoes, straight up, and J.J.
had the belay device. And so every
30 feet or so, I would put
in a piece of webbing and a
carabiner. You go up another 30
feet, and you don't know what you're
gonna find. And you're
going up in the dark.
- So when you say a lot of strength
is involved, there are very few
places to rest. You're essentially
just lifting the whole time.
So it's extremely exhausting.
- Extremely exhausting. I really
trained for a long time, and there is
no rest. The only rest you
get hurts. You have to
cling to the tree and your feet are
smeared against the bark. You're
holding on with your toes.
And if you fall, you know, if
you're climbing up—this is basically
trad climbing—if you're climbing up
and you put a safety—a piece of
rope with a carabiner—and you
put my rope through that... It's
dangerous because if you fall,
you fall. Right before you put the next
one, you're going to fall double. If
you climb 30 feet, you fall 60 feet.
And your head's going to smack the
tree. As you climb, you don't know
if you'll reach a wasp
nest or a venomous snake.
- And there's a lot of those in those trees.
- A lot of those. It took me over an
hour just to get to the branches
the first time. It's full exertion,
everything I had. And then you get
to where the branches are above you,
each the size of a mature oak tree.
They're just these huge branches.
Thick as a minivan. You're
climbing up this straight tree
that's like the World Trade Center.
It's huge. Then I had to traverse
the tree on vines, and finally I
get up into the crown of this tree.
From there, I called down to J.J.
and I just see this little speck of
light, 85 feet below me. Then I
climbed up to about 120 feet,
which is up here, and I sat there.
- And you're doing all
this still in darkness.
- We're doing all this in the pre-dawn
light. And so when I got up
there, now the howler monkeys are
going and the jungle's starting
to vibrate. You can hear the first macaws
starting to chirp; everything's starting to turn
on. And in the east, the sun is
coming over the jungle, and so the
sun, when the first rays
get line of sight to the canopy of the
jungle, it starts lifting the mist off the
canopy. All of that moisture starts
coming up, and I'm sitting on this branch
at 100-something feet above the
ground with dark jungle below
me, and all of a sudden I see the river.
I see the Mist River I'd always
heard about. They say that
there's a river above the
Amazon, an invisible river that
has more moisture and that more water is
flowing above the Amazon than is flowing in
the Amazon. And I'd heard this my whole life
and you think, "Okay, the fact that there's a
molten core of the Earth or that black holes
theoretically exist." It's just like the, one of
those things, you're never going to see
it." And in this moment on this tree,
sweating and just ripped apart and
bleeding, I was sitting up there and I
saw the Mist River and
it was flowing over the
canopy in the golden rays of
the morning, and the macaws
start taking flight and there were
monkeys below me that were looking
up. And you could tell they were confused.
They were looking at me going, "What is that?"
And I just had this absolutely
incredible moment. I wanted
to... You know, it felt
like you're seeing God. I
wanted to share it with everyone.
You know, I felt, I felt guilty
afterwards for having had a moment
like that. But it felt like I had done
this insane risk and
risked falling out of the tree or
getting strung up on the ropes, and of
course it's just me and J.J., so if
something goes wrong, no one's going to help
you. And being out there on that
branch felt suicidal because
even then, if you fall, it's a giant
swing back to the tree. But the
beauty that I saw up there was so
intense that it, you know, it sucked the
air right out of my lungs. I had tears
in my eyes and I'm just watching
this incredible process flow
over the Earth, this legendary
thing that I'd heard about, that scientists
described, and now I'm seeing it with my
own eyes. It was... it felt
like the gift of the tree.
- And you write, "Now, in the branches
of the greatest tree in the jungle, I
watched as the Mist River caught the
morning rays, illuminating golden
currents, swirling as it rushed
over the canopy like a stream from
heaven. In the troughs and
basins in lower areas,
the river was deep blue. But
then, as it flowed up and
over the taller trees, slow rapids
washing over the canopy, the
Mist River became ignited,
electrified in the gold
magnificence of the sunlight.
Scores of birds flew
up, in and out of the churning currents.
The life and breath of the Amazon was
flowing from north to south along the basins
of Las Piedras over the jungle. My
God. My God. I thought of everyone I
loved, of every creature
contained in the leafy
distance. The jungle itself
was like a great being, a
monstrous leviathan of warm green might. I
wanted to call down to JJ and
tell him to find a way up. I
wanted my mother to see it. I wanted
the world to see it. The light
filled my eyes, and I
found myself wiping away
tears." You know, I should
take the small tangent
of saying the obvious, but the
thing that needs to be said
is you're a great writer.
- Thank you. I mean it, come on. I'm
just describing what happened, but...
- All right. You mentioned macaws as part
of the process of The Jungle Waking Up.
I read that when you first start
in the jungle, that's kind of your
job is studying those. And me as
a fan of monogamy and birds...
So macaws are beautiful, but
they're also monogamous creatures.
They scream at each other quite
loudly. What are some interesting
things about them? Among which, by
the way, you write how important
the ironwoods are to— ...their
wellbeing, to their life.
- Yeah, I mean, when I went
down there, like I said,
for young people, if you want to get out there,
go do it. I agreed to stay at the station
and do six hours of macaw
research every morning.
So you'd wake up before dawn and go sit
and just stare at the side of the river.
And the macaws would show up-
...and like you said, they all scream and
bicker at each other. It's just how they
talk. It's very, very loud,
and very, very harsh.
But they do love each
other. They're always...
You can actually hear when you walk through
the forest; I know what the sound of
macaws giving affection is. They
make a certain kind of sound when
they're just preening each other's
feathers and taking care of each
other and just nuzzling. And then
there's a different call altogether when
they're yelling at other macaws or saying,
"Let's go." And you start to learn
macaw language.
- What have you learned about
relationships and successful marriage
from listening to macaws screaming at
each other in nuanced different ways?
- Well, I guess...
- Never mind, you can skip that question.
- Yeah. It's interesting to see two
animals sticking by each other's side
raising a chick. And at the bottom of the
stairs at the station, there is a macaw
nest in an ironwood. And the
relationship that you mentioned is
that in the jungle, there's a
limited amount of macaw real estate.
And those are all ancient ironwood
trees, at least 500 years or more.
So they have to be thick.
Car-thickness or bigger. And
when a branch falls off, it creates a hollow
and the macaws use that to reproduce.
And because there's only so many
nest sites in the forest, only about
17 to 20% of the macaw population
reproduces in a given year.
given year. So they have a
slow replacement rate. And
macaws are one of the things that
people come to the jungle to
see. And so along with gold mining
and logging and all these extractive
things, in our region,
ecotourism has been great. It's
given the local people jobs
as guides, cooks, and chefs
and carpenters. And so macaws
are a huge part of that because
it's one of the last places where you can
see these flying rainbows over the canopy.
Or when you're on a branch from one of
these trees and the macaws fly under you.
And again, they'll fly
by. You just hear the
wind in their feathers. And they just look
at you over their shoulder, like,
"What?" And just keep going.
Just loud, and they'll just keep going. Then they'll
join up with other macaws and they fly across the
horizon. And it gives you this
sense like you're seeing something
from the dinosaur times.
It just looks like
wild jungle, and there's nothing
human in sight. There's just this
savage canopy to the horizon and just
these beautiful birds flying over.
It's just... they're just magical.
- You have this Instagram post
with an anaconda around
your neck. There's a million
questions. Maybe you can talk
about that experience, but
also, how did you not die?
- So as you know, we've
been studying the habits
of Eunectes murinus for quite a while.
The lowland green anaconda is the
largest, heaviest snake on earth. And
I've been practicing a lot for
a long time, and this is the
biggest one we've ever physically
caught. This was just under
20 feet. It was 19 feet
something. And you can see
she's in the middle of
shedding. And the other
interesting thing with her is that she
had blue eyes because she was in the
middle of shedding. The scale
over their eyes turns blue right
before it comes off. And so I've never
caught a blue-eyed anaconda before.
But if you look at the size of my head and
the size of my hands, you start to imagine
that thing's head is bigger
than a Great Dane's.
It's huge. And the power on that—when
we tried to lift her to measure her, we
wanted to bring her up out of the stream and
get her over to the side so we can
straighten her out and measure her.
We're just trying to take some simple
data points and then release her.
And she, at one point, just decided to
flex her body, and you just see 10 people
fly this way, and then she's flexing the
other way and 10 people fly this way.
And every time that mouth would
open, she would try to... she'd just
reach back and be like,
"Just let me do it."
And you know that if she gets purchase—
once they get purchase, they
wrap you so quick and they'll
just crush the life out of you
like you're a bag of chips. And if
you've ever seen a mouse in a mousetrap, when
the trap goes down and the eyes come out?
And when snakes—anybody that's owned
snakes and fed them mice knows
this—that sometimes if they catch it
right, the guts will either come out the
back end or the front end. So, I'd imagine
that the same thing will happen with a
snake that's that big. That's
bigger than I am around.
- So, they have a process. When you say purchase,
they want a bite just to hold and then
they— It's good. So...
- But again, all she wants is
to be let go. In her defense,
this massive snake—we named her Millie for
the data entry—she just wanted to go on
her way down the stream. The
comments on this are hysterical.
People are like, "This is the
worst example of white people shit
I've ever seen." I mean, Snoop
Dogg shared it. So, one guy goes,
he goes, "Congratulations, you've
touched enough grass. Go back inside."
- Yeah, somebody said,
"Interesting use of free will."
Yeah, and I saw Killpopper007 commented—
and maybe you can tell
me if this is correct:
"Anacondas are ambush predators.
If you approach them, they will
usually try to flee and will not
register you as food. There's
other reasons too." This is in response to
how Paul possibly didn't die from this.
"There's other reasons too, but this
is the main reason. They're pretty
much apex at that size,
so their fear isn't as
prominent. He was calm, so the
snake was calm. It's insane to do
and still risky, but he might
actually be the most qualified
anaconda handler on
Planet Earth. Paul is one
interesting cat." Hugging
emoji. Is that accurate?
- Yes. At that size, they're apex,
so they're really not thinking
about defense. They're
just like, "Get off me."
If I was to hurt her—like if I
was to touch you in the arm with
a needle—you'd react. If I was to
do anything that hurt her, which
I'm not doing, she would turn around
and bite me to say, "Go away." But
they also don't want to bite because their
recurved teeth make it very difficult to
detach. And also, they're putting
their head at the source of the
danger. It's not a good
calculation. And so these giants—
and I've had the privilege of
interacting with four or five
anacondas in the 20 to 26-foot
range—all of them have
been very Leviathan-like.
And they just don't
wanna move. They just
wanna keep going. And he's
100% right on all of
that stuff. I've caught
90-something anacondas at this
point, and many of them have been
massive. Then there's the one that JJ and I didn't
get at the Floating Forest because it was bigger
than— bigger than we could tackle,
bigger than my hands. I couldn't touch
fingers. But every single one
of them has chosen flight
over fight. Only the little
babies and the smaller
males get snappy. They'll come back at you like
a normal snake, and if you grab their tail,
they'll try and bite you and
then go. But these big females,
you know, they're like dragons. They're
like these big, legendary things that live
in swamps, and the only reason they've
gotten that big is because they have a
reliable prey source in
a secluded place away
from humans, and they've been there
for decades just pulling things
down to hell and eating
them. And the other
thing... I mean, look, I have a
team with me. You know? So...
- So, there's people holding the—
- Yeah. Let's be real here. I would never
do this. If I was out in the jungle
by myself at night, doing
this would be suicide,
100%, because for every second
that I'm going, "Oh, I'm in this
water and she's over my neck," if JJ
wasn't there to jump in and unwrap her—
...then I die. 100%.
- Because she's continuously wrapping.
- She's on her back saying, "Come in here,"
"and let me arm bar you. Let me squeeze
the guts out of you." She's just
going, "Let it happen."
- And moving slowly.
- Moving really slow—
- Conjuring
- with that assurance of power where she
doesn't need to try and tap you quick.
She's going to get you eventually.
- Although, to push back on something
you just said, having known you long
enough, let's be honest. You're saying
I wouldn't be insane enough to do it.
I think you would be. I mean, there's...
There's a line of insanity, and
you, my friend, walk that line
masterfully so far. I think
when you're able to sense the
animal, whether it's crocodiles,
caiman, or anacondas, and
maybe radiate a sense of calm—
I've seen you be able to go
into some dangerous situations,
and make it seem like it's not
dangerous at all. And maybe when you
become one with the ecosystem, maybe
you're not a threat to
it, and maybe that's why
you can survive? I haven't been
able to make sense of it, really.
- Look, I would say this. In the case of
elephants, if we ever end up in Africa
together, I can get incredibly close
to elephants because I've spent enough
time with them where, time with them
where, so far, it's always been a mock
charge. And you can be one with the
elephant and learn their
language enough that you
respect their boundaries and
you also show them that, this
better be serious because you're either going to
have to kill me, or just turn around and go back to
eating. And you can have
that exchange with them.
With smaller snakes, I'll be
careful. I can tell you with
this that when you have both of
your hands around an anaconda's
neck... I truly... I mean,
I've been known to surprise
myself with the decisions I make, but
this alone would lead to death, 100%.
It's like laying down in front of an 18-wheeler
with it in neutral. "It's going to roll
over you." This is going to turn into
anaconda handcuffs with this
thickness, and then that
is going to wrap you with this thickness, and then
six more of those are going to go around your
body and you will get squeezed
and you will turn into goop.
Just like that guy said, she probably is in
defense mode and not food mode, so she'll
probably just neutralize the
threat and then go back to sleep.
- I have to ask you about the floating
forest. And you write about Santiago,
once again, beautifully in the
book, of the time when he told
you the stories and when your
mind and eyes were still fresh
and maybe skeptical and
more leaning towards the
Western world point of view
versus the jungle point of
view. "Santiago's eyes were glowing
in the darkness. He watched
the orange ember spark upward
to join the celestial river of
stars that arched across the
night sky as if the memories
were written there. He squinted,
his face as wrinkled and
weathered as an old map of
the world. Vast experience
whispered in the firelight, as
ephemeral as the breath that
spoke the words, but powerful
enough to latch on and
sink down into some deep part of me."
This is Pico saying, "Papa, tell me about
the anaconda on the
blackwater stream." And,
He tells a story of that, and he talks
about it being big and having horns.
And you write once again
masterfully about you at that
time having doubts. It
sounds like bullshit, but
now more and more of the things
you've seen in the jungle
and the things you sense you have not
seen yet, all of those stories seem to be
true. The one he was referring
to was maybe 36 feet
long, this big. He says that, "The
floating forest is the place
you need to go, Gringo,
if you want to be liberated of your doubts
and skepticism." So tell me about the
anacondas you've encountered
in the floating forest.
- Well, the thing he's describing there is
that he's saying they found an anaconda that
had horns.
And in that moment, we were all hanging out
by the side of the river and I said, "That's
enough." I stood up. I was like, "Come
on, there's no anaconda that has horns."
And if I've learned anything
in 20 years of living with the
indigenous people in the Amazon, it's that
they're not wrong. You know, if they say
there's a tribe of naked
people with arrows out there,
they're right, they're
right. And they know what an
anaconda looks like. So if he
says he saw an anaconda with
horns, he saw something that ain't a
normal anaconda. And a smaller version of
this played out recently where
one of the people that works
at the tree house, he came
and he said, "I found a
snake and it was in the water
tank." And he goes, "And it had
green spikes on it." And I said,
"There's no snake that has green spikes." I
said, "Congratulations, you're an idiot."
I made fun of him.
And I said, "I know all the snake species
that are here. None of them have spikes.
There's no snake that has spikes coming off of
it." And he said, "No, it had long spikes."
He said, "The snake is this big and had spikes this
long on it." And I said, "There's no snake with
spikes." Until finally he
came and he got me in the
night and he goes, "The snake with spikes is
there." And I said, "Well, I'll get out of bed
for that. Let's go." And I said, "I
guarantee it's not gonna be there."
And we got to the water tank and
I shined my flashlight down and
sure as shit, there's a
snake in there and it's got
thousands of green spikes coming off
of it. And I could see the snake head
and then the spikes are coming
completely perpendicular out from its
body. And for a second, I really was having
this out-of-body experience. And then the
snake saw us, got scared
and swam, and all of the
the spikes collapsed onto
its body and became smooth.
And then I realized the snake had been living
in the stagnant water for a while and developed
algae that was growing off of it.
So when it was sitting still, all
the algae would settle out.
And so if you look straight down on it,
it's a water snake that has algae growing
on it. And so it does look like a
snake with spikes. He's not wrong.
It was a water snake. It
was some sort of Helicops.
But there's always an answer like that.
- Amazing.
- They're not wrong. So when they tell
you something like, "There's an
anaconda with horns," and
multiple people have seen it—
...you make an expedition there.
If somebody said there's giant ground sloths in
this valley, I wouldn't be like, "They're extinct."
I'd be like, "Where?" You start
to listen. I mean, after,
after the tribe walked out of the
forest, you could tell me anything.
That day, if a Tyrannosaurus rex walked out
behind them, I would've been like, "Makes
sense."
- Let's go to the floating forest. Do you
ever think about what creatures are in
there? I just had a conversation with
Michael Levin at Tufts
University. He's this biologist
who creates biological life forms in the
lab, but he also studies all
kinds of weird, what he calls
unconventional intelligences
on Earth. And he speaks
about that from a perspective
of just understanding the
incredible intricacies and
weirdnesses of biological
systems. So the soup of organisms that's
there in the floating forest is probably
incredible. Do you ever think about
what kind of weirdness is there?
- Yeah. Along with giant snakes,
there are animals existing in
an ecosystem that's isolated,
right? And so the tepuis...
In the movie Up, those Venezuelan
cliff jungles with the straight walls,
like Angel Falls? Up there you
have this allopatric speciation
occurring where these isolated communities
are departing from whatever's down there.
So on the floating forest, you have
this very unique ecosystem where
animals are living on grassy islands
and in the tops of palm trees.
In that nightmare soup that exists
beneath the rafts, there are
probably insects and, I mean,
I've seen lizards there that we
have been unable to identify.
There are things there in the...
I can't imagine the...
decay is probably not happening. There's
not a lot of oxygen in that water.
I've brought a few scientists there
and they've all just been like,
"This is... this is..." you know.
- Yeah. How do you even
- "How did this form?" We've brought hydrologists
there and they're like, "How the hell did this
thing form?" And then trying to study what
creatures live under that is amazing.
- But the big anacondas, it's
interesting because they
truly are the apex, so they're
unbothered. They're not really using
their power for anything.
- No, and I'm sure if I bit her,
she'd turn around and kill me.
- Yeah, but in a bored kind of
way. Like, it wouldn't even...
It would just slowly kill you.
- I wonder though, once she killed
you, if she'd just be like-
- Just take a bite?
- I mean, would she bite?
They swallow, right?
- Well-
- Once you collapse your shoulders,
it's like if you killed
a perfectly good hamburger and it was
like in your hands dead, you'd be like-
"Maybe I'll try it."
- I mean, they need the calories.
- Yeah, and then take a six-month nap.
- Yeah. They're truly incredible,
majestic creatures.
- Yeah, I love this picture.
Just, again, look at the size.
I want you one day to feel
them. And again, the wild
ones are not like the captive ones,
which are soft from sitting in a cage.
These guys have been flexing every day.
It's like you're hitting steel cables.
It's just wild.
- And even if it's just being chill, you
can probably get a hint of the power
it's capable of, right?
- The one good thing about those really big
ones is that when they do strike, it's like
it's like being in a fight with
a big fat guy. It's like that,
that haymaker comes from way
back here and you're like-
..."Oh, good." You're like, "I'm gonna
duck." And you get down. Because
they open their mouth and
they start accelerating.
And it's pretty easy to
either get out of the way or,
you know, catch it before it hits you.
...usually. Again, if you ever mess that
up, just like the haymaker from the
big guy, it's over.
- Your level of knowledge and comfort
with snakes is incredible. I think they
- Play with them a lot.
- ...sense that. I mean, I've seen you with
snakes and they must sense it, because
they must sense in you the
camaraderie. You have a way of
speaking to animals and about
animals like there's zero danger.
Well, from my outsider
perspective, it seems like a
lot of them are full of danger if you're
not communicating to them correctly.
- With snakes, I think it's more of a
highway analogy: it's dangerous,
but you can drive safely.
I know what I'm doing, so if I'm working
with a snake that can't envenomate
me and is small, I can allow it to
freak out. And then if I can get it
into my hands and it goes, "Ooh, it's
nice in here." And of course, like
you said, I'm not scared. They are very
sensitive to that, so he's going, "Okay, this
isn't so bad." You can chill him
out. But I don't think snakes
have any camaraderie. I
think that whales, monkeys,
elephants, I think they can sense. They can
say, "Okay, this person's trying to help"
to get me out of this net. I'm
gonna relax and not kill them."
In those cases, you have that dynamic.
- Speaking of an animal that does
have camaraderie, there's this
incredible video on your Instagram
that people should go watch where
incredible video where this spider monkey
was drowning and you jumped in to rescue it.
- Sure. So we're coming down river.
It's seven o'clock in the morning,
so I'm cold. I'm sitting on
the boat and I'm wearing
whatever. JJ's like, "Look,
spider monkey." And I go, "Great,
spider monkey in the river." That's
normal. But JJ's like, "No, she's
having trouble." And I was like,
"Why? They swim all the time."
And he goes, "You should help."
So the boat comes around.
Then sure enough, what you can't see in the video is
that the river was so full that there were these little
whirlpools and currents, and she was trying to get
to the side. And again, all the animal rights people
are very quick to be like,
"Let nature take its course. Let the monkey drown."
Or, "She doesn't need help. You're interfering."
Sure, sure, sure. If you were
actually there, you would know
that she did need help and she was
drowning. Her head kept going under.
And so I saw that JJ was
right. And so we pull around.
I took off whatever I could in the
moment, jumped in with the paddle—
because, now, here again, I trust monkeys,
but I don't want her to bite me. She is going to be
scared, so I thought, there's two ways I can do this.
I can grab her by the neck and the tail and take her
out of the river, which is going to be scary for her.
Instead I thought, "I know spider monkeys
so well. I've raised so many of them."
And when you raise them, they curl
up to your neck and they'll...
If you have an orphan spider monkey whose mother
got shot by poachers and you're taking care of her
before we bring them to the
animal rehabilitation experts,
they'll curl up on your neck and
they'll go, "Oh, oh, oh, oh,"
and they'll just talk to you in your ear. So I feel
like I know a little bit of broken spider monkey.
I pull up next to her and
I give her the paddle.
We're in this rushing river moving
at 10 miles an hour downstream,
and I try to give her the
paddle and she smacks it away.
She was like, "No, get away from me." Then she keeps
swimming, goes under again, and I give her the paddle again.
She puts a hand around the paddle, and that
moment that you paused on, she looked back at me.
She looked at me like—yeah, right there.
She registered like, "Oh, this is
another animal with a face."
- For people just listening, you need to go watch the
video. You guys are just looking at each other,
and she's looking right
at you. It's so cool.
- She looked right at me, but then she went,
"No." She was like, "Whatever you are, no."
She was like, "I'd rather die in the
river." She was so scared and drowning,
and she looked at me and got
scared and jumped back in.
Then I lifted her up and I went, "Oh, oh, oh,
oh," and I started talking in spider monkey.
And she just... then, in the next moment,
you see it. She just goes, "Sure."
And she wraps her tail... you see her
tail is around the edge of the paddle.
She puts her hand around it, and then I lifted her. Because
I'm taller than she is, I lifted her out of the river.
So now, instead of manhandling her like
a raccoon you're catching by the neck
she's holding on in her spider
monkey way to the paddle, and she
and she looks back over her shoulder. I'm sitting there
going, "Oh, oh, oh, oh," talking to her in spider monkey.
And she looks at me, and
you hear her. She goes...
I can't do the sound she makes,
but she does this, "Whoa!"
spider monkey sound like, "Guh!"
And she goes, "Fine." And then she's looking
off the front end of the paddle as she's
looking at the jungle, and she looks back at
me and she's like... You could just tell.
She's like, "I have no
idea what's happening."
But she accepted the help. And
the difference is, it's because I
spoke her language in this case. And
I know that would be one of those
stories that people would nail me on every
time if it wasn't on camera. You can
see the moment that she makes direct
eye contact with me and goes, "Okay."
And then as soon as we get to shore, she jumps
off and runs off into the forest, but it was-
- It's so... I mean, just watching the
video, it's so amazing. She's looking at
you. Like, real... You can see
that there's an actual connection.
It's... that there's like communication,
like a social... You know, the way
humans, when you're maybe
saving a human being that's
drowning or something like this.
There's that connection. It was
beautiful to see, man. And then I read
a little bit that spider monkeys have...
they're very intelligent, but they're
especially socially intelligent. So they
have social connections with each
other. So they understand what
that means. They understand what
another entity means. So you
speaking it in a broken language, probably
is really important and a powerful
way to indicate that, "Wow, you're
in network." Like a foreigner, but like
- It's like you're in a foreign country
and someone goes, "Helping, helping."
- Yeah, exactly.
- Like, "Helping." And you go, "Okay,
sure." Like, you know, "You're not
robbing me, you're helping," right?
But no, they're incredibly... And I'm telling
you, I've had orphan spider monkeys so many
times. And they wrap their tail
around your neck and they hug you.
And you realize that connection that they
have with their mothers when they hold onto
them in the canopy... When the
loggers shoot the mother and then I'm
taking care of this baby,
they hold onto you.
And they need that love and that
connection more than they need food.
If you put food or you put warmth of
a body, they'll choose the connection
over the sustenance.
- Yeah, they really value the
touching, that connection.
- Very tactile. They're very loving.
They wrap their long spider
monkey arms around each other.
They're very much like us.
They hold their babies.
When it rains, spider monkeys
will get together and huddle up.
They'll pull leaves down and all
huddle up together. When it's cold-
they get close. It's very cute.
- Yeah, I mean, they're distant relatives,
but that's true for a lot of our
relatives. The apes, the chimps,
all of them, they have this
intricate... They're different. Sometimes
more violent, sometimes more loving.
But social interactions,
it's cool that way.
- Yeah, I mean, you expect it from
them. They're practically us.
To me, it's when other animals
show. The times that I've
been on a trail and a jaguar has
walked by and just been like, "'Sup?"
Keep walking. And it's like, "It's
kind of cool of you not to eat me."
"I appreciate it."
- Has that happened to you?
- Yeah. I thought somebody was walking on
the trail. I was doing a camera trap.
And I put my finger up and I was gonna
go, "Could you walk any louder?"
- Oh, yeah.
- I'm crouched because I was
doing a camera trap. A jaguar
walked by and he literally was just
like shoom, shoom, kicking leaves,
just having fun, mouth open. And
he just walked by, looked at me,
and went, "'Sup?" Never broke stride.
Dead-ass eye contact with the bottom
teeth out and that jaguar look
of just like, "Hey." I was like, "Okay."
Now I'm going to have a full meltdown.
Your system, you start sweating.
You're like, "Whoa." Because
they're also so beautiful.
When you see a jaguar, it's bright
yellow and the teeth and the muscles...
It's... You know...
- What do you think you communicated to
the jaguar that it didn't kill you?
- No, nothing. The jaguar was making
the decisions. I didn't do anything.
saved my life. He was
just going somewhere.
And because he's the king
there, he just went, "Uh."
- Yeah, probably also not threatened.
- Not threatened at all.
- I think there is something to you.
You're just taking for granted
the things that you're
putting out into the world.
You're probably radiating calm.
Or not calm- but non-threat.
- Certainly non-threat. I also smell
like an animal when I'm in the
jungle, right? I shower in the
river. I don't use deodorant
or shampoo or any of that
stuff. So I don't smell...
Imagine to animals that have a
smell that's four times as good as
that's four times as good as ours,
just your deodorant, your conditioner—
... just whatever other products,
the detergent on your clothes...
We smell like Times Square. We
smell like a fire alarm to them.
They're like, "What is this thing?
It smells very foreign and scary."
Everything's scary. Speaking of scary,
the jaguar was kind of friendly.
He was like, "'Sup?" It's almost
like he'd seen me before.
He was like, "Oh, it's just
you." The one time I stood—
on the forest floor in India with
a wild tiger and nobody else,
the thing the tiger did that was so
unnerving... And again, a tiger's back
is... they're so much bigger than
you think. It's like four jaguars.
They're so big.
She wouldn't look at me, and it was
terrifying. She would look over there,
she would look like this,
she would look like that,
and never eye contact. It was like,
"You're as important to me as a stick."
When you see two fighters square
up, it's all about the eye contact.
But you look through a person; you
pretend they're not even there.
person. You pretend they're
not even there. That-
That tiger insulted me on such
a profound and disarming level
that I never forgot it. It was like,
"You matter as much as a sparrow."
"You're just not one of the
things that I care about."
She just was looking around
and carried on doing it.
She was like, "I'm gonna walk
this way." And I was just like,
"Holy shit, I'm gonna run."
It's just profound insignificance
from this god of an animal
with paws the size of dinner plates. I
was like, "Man, if she does look at me,
if she looks at me, I'm gonna probably..."
- That's the end.
- You know, that's the end.
- Yeah, it shows how much more powerful
she is. That's probably the most
terrifying animal on earth. Tigers—
- The rock-paper-scissors of land predators.
I think the polar bear and tiger
have to be the most scary.
- Yeah, polar bears.
- Polar bear's pretty scary.
- Yeah, you don't mess with a polar bear.
- I don't think they're as fast as tigers,
but you're not going fast on the ice.
With a tiger, you can't outrun it. If
you climb a tree, they climb better.
If you get in a car, they could smash the
door. If a tiger decides it wants you,
pretty much nothing... Even if you had a
gun, even if you had a nine millimeter,
it isn't going to stop
a tiger that wants you.
- In the jungle, have you ever felt
in danger? Putting humans aside,
were there animals...?
You've talked about how humans
are really the source of danger.
...how humans, they're
the source of danger.
Is there... You often
speak about animals as
a, you know, source of beauty and wonder—
...and elegance and grace and
all these things which they
are. But I'm sure you've felt danger.
- Yeah. I mean, I'm very aware that a hornet's
nest can kill you. They'll kill you.
- Oh, so the little guys.
- The little guys suck. You know, the—
I always think like when we
were going through the jungle—
...one machete whack, and again, people
don't realize how dense it is. You try to
run, you get hung up on vines, you trip,
you fall onto one of those trees with the
black spikes. And then while you're laying there
dealing with all that, they're just stinging
you and your body—
...goes into anaphylactic shock and
you die instantly. It's like you
just... That can very
quickly just take you out.
- You're right. I mean, speaking of spikes,
the biggest danger is not even the
spikes. The spikes just, 'cause it creates
open wounds and then that can lead
slowly—
- Infection
- ...to infection. So it's really
that—that is the biggest danger.
- Yeah. In the Amazon, I've never heard of a
human-directed violent jaguar in
our region. They just don't attack
people. I'd say mosquitoes are
the thing that come after you.
The snakes just want to be left
alone. Even the venomous snakes.
Again, I grabbed an 11-foot
bushmaster by the tail and he turned
around, he lifted up to about this
high off the ground. And if you
could translate what he said,
it was just, "Don't make me
do it." It just said,
you know, "Make my day."
- See, but that's the thing.
You speak snake language.
- And then I put the tail down.
- You speak snake.
- I went, "Okay." I was
sufficiently scared. So the
problem happens when you don't know
what you're doing. I'll give you—
...an example. You want a dangerous animal
story, I'll give you one. I was walking one
time and I was trying to be responsible. It
always happens when I'm trying to be responsible—
...I get into trouble. Trying
to be safe, and you fall down.
I'm on the side of the stream and there's
elephants on the other side of the...
I'm in India. There's a deep,
like a 12-foot thing, and then a
stream and then on the other side there's elephants.
And I'm walking and I'm like, "I'm gonna sit in a
tree and I'm gonna enjoy these elephants.
I'm gonna make notes in my book like Jane
Goodall." Then I came up against a cement
wall, and it was the back of a male
elephant. And in India, it's a male
elephant that's been harassed and had
fire thrown at it and God knows what
else. And he... And if I translate
what he said, he turned around and he just went,
"What the fuck?" He just looked at me like,
how dare you? And then just... smacks
apart the tree, turns around, and then
that elephant was trying to kill
me. That was not a mock charge.
I threw off my backpack, zigzagged
through the woods. He broke
apart trees. If I had a GoPro on
my back to show you what I saw,
just the shrapnel and devastation
of this thing just bashing through
trees. Every bush that I
encounter is a possible trip.
Every vine is a possible hang-up.
And if they get you, he'll step
on you and crush you. So I
threw myself off the edge of
this cliff, rolled down into the stream,
and the elephant got to the edge and
almost fell on me. He got to
the edge and did one of these,
and then came back down on his hind feet.
Picked up a stick, threw it at
me. And the stick just smacked
down next to me in the stream. I remember
I gave him the finger because I was alive.
And then he just stormed
off into the jungle.
- I mean, there's nothing like an elephant.
- There's nothing like an
elephant anywhere. There's a...
I loved listening. I was so
excited when I put on your podcast
with the dinosaur guy—
because he was like, "When a baby
is born, it learns, you know,
elephant, giraffe, T-Rex."
And I was like, "Holy shit."
Along with like banana, water,
sky is blue. Somehow these are initial
things in your first few months on Earth—
these are the characters you're introduced
to. How the hell did T-Rex get there?
They don't even exist anymore.
It was just such a fun... I could
hear you smiling through the mic,
and I was like, "Oh, this
is gonna be a good one."
- Yeah. I mean, the dinosaur
world is incredible—
- It's wild.
- but the fact that you have such a
predator evolve with such a gigantic jaw,
so much destructive power, is weird.
- And then he broke my heart because he
was talking about how the T-Rex and
Stegosaurus... he's like, "All the
books have them together," and then,
"They're nowhere near each other."
"They did not exist at the
same time," and I was like...
- I want them to battle with each other.
- Yes.
- Speaking of elephants, I feel like we'll
be up for an adventure at some point.
After all this chaos is over, you think
back in the jungle? Africa? India?
- I think I would love to show you
a herd of truly wild elephants
in the African jungle. I think that us
going on a boat trip through
the Amazon, not a hiking one—
where we're going through areas where
you can get permits to go through
where no one's allowed to go.
They're completely protected areas,
and you can just go for a week through
areas where the animals have no idea
what a human is. So you can move through
it, and it'd be a little bit more of an
enjoyable experience, not a survival
situation. And go with J.J. in a boat
and just travel through the Amazon.
"Hey, maybe we protect this river."
And then the river's mapped from north
to south, and we just raft down with
boat support, you know?
- It's really incredible to see how it's
all connected. I mean, the river,
it's the thread that connects the
whole story. And so it's nice
to see how it all is connected.
And that's why us starting in the
mountains is also really nice to
see, you know, where it begins.
But it keeps going. The story keeps going.
- It keeps going. We did start in the
mountains. An epic first day together.
- And hopefully, people get a
chance to see that video.
So I gotta ask you about the
writing. I mentioned you're
an incredible writer. What's
your writing process like for
this book, Jungle Keeper, for The Mother
God, and for future books you're writing?
Are you like a Stephen King? Do you go
to some dark places in the basement?
Do you write every single day?
Do you take little notes? Like, your
notebook has a bunch of doodles
and a bunch of writing. Like,
what's your process like?
- I try to journal every day
for a number of reasons.
It's accountability. It helps me keep track...
It's fun to see your hopes and dreams.
It's fun to record the mundane
moments that we all forget about,
and that might be, like, cooking
in the kitchen with your mother.
That might be a fun walk you had with
your dog. Like, little things that you
think you're going to remember, but you just
don't. And so I have piles of notebooks.
I have just piles and piles
of notebooks in my room.
And when something happens, I write it down.
If a cool story happens, I will write it down,
story happens, I will write
it down, or if I find a
leaf from an extinct tree
I will make an etching
Anything that happens that I
find remarkable in any way,
either for my own personal
memory or for writing,
I'll write it down. And then when I go
back to it later, A, I have a very
good memory, and B, the facts are
there. And so when something happens
like you rescue a spider monkey
or something happens that's remarkable in
life—you get to spend time with
someone that you haven't in a
long time and you get that feeling of like, "Oh,
that's why I'm such good friends with them."
You write these things
down, and then it's always
there. And so I feel like whenever I
don't journal that I'm missing out
on keeping my life and my memories.
So yeah. I don't do the... That
Stephen King quote about how
"Amateurs wait for inspiration, and
the professionals, we go to work every
day." And he's like, "Ten pages a day,"
or whatever it is. I don't do that.
I write when I feel like it. And I like
to... You know, I'll start thinking,
"Oh, this is a perfect way
to start this scene," because
the moment this happened, I
felt so intensely. And if we bring
people in and out, I'll just be in a car
or boat or something, and I'll just start
thinking about it and I'll go, "This is..."
Just the thing is, you gotta carpe diem.
Then I'll go, "Okay, where did that happen
again?" And I'll go to that page. And I'll go,
"Okay, so what exactly happened?"
Then you get the laptop, and yeah.
So it's brain to paper to
laptop, always paper in between.
- Well, how do you go from
disparate notes to the final
thing? Because it's difficult to
convey the experience through words,
and you do that well. So is this like...
Do you edit a lot? Do you iterate?
- That's where Stephen King was right.
Because I look at writing like
sculpting. You- you have
to have something to
sculpt. And so when you're thinking of a
story... Again, a lot of...
I mean, I love listening to
great storytellers. And I actually love listening to
bad stories, just like I like watching bad movies to
see what they did wrong. When you listen to
someone that starts a story and they have you
hooked from the second they start, and then
you're like, "Wait, but how did that happen?
And why was that happening? What happened next?"
And they keep you going and they drop the
information perfectly. And so every now
and then, you figure that out in that
moment of inspiration. So then I
have my facts written down here.
And then I'll do an outline on a page
or something. But then I have to get
it all out of me with a pen. Then I can
move to... I'll almost close my eyes.
I'll almost just close my eyes and write the
story out. I just need to... You're making
the... You're literally making your
clay, and so it's like you make the
shape of the thing before you... And
then editing is giving it details.
- So you do take passes like—
- Oh, my God, yes. I mean, dozens.
That's where writing sucks.
When you're finishing a book—and I'll
never do that again. So what I'm doing now
is... this last book, there's
so much that it covered.
And I was in the jungle, and it'd be like
hiking for ten hours a day, you know,
dealing with narcotraffickers, and
then I'd have to edit at night.
It was like, "This is no way to
live." So now what I'm doing is
I'm writing chapters as I feel like
writing chapters. When something
something remarkable happens, I go,
"This is going to be its own chapter."
I write it, edit it, and then I
send it to my sister who's an
expert editor and has lived
more in literature than
most people live in real life. She'll
let me know if it's good or bad,
if it needs to be tweaked. When I get
it back from her, it's marked up.
And now what I'm going to do
is I'm just going to put those
aside. And then, the next time I
want to write a book, it's not
starting from scratch on 300,000
words; it's just here, and it's ready.
Much easier.
- What kind of books do you think
you might write in the future?
- Well, there's Mother of God, and
now Jungle Keeper. And then I'm
already working on Endgame. Because
there is so much that has happened. I
think I told you when you were
there, but right before you
came, me and JJ went to the
back end, behind our river—
to this horrible part of the
Amazon that's 10 times more
lawless than where we are. Instead
of no people, there are people.
If you want to talk about Amazonian
No Country for Old Men, it's the oil
companies, the missionaries,
and the newly contacted tribes.
There's a people called the
Nahua, and they were recently
contacted and ripped out of the
forest. They're standing there
with their little bows and
arrows. They're tiny people. The—
the normales are tall. The Nahua
are small. And we just saw
brutality in this horrific...
It's like Sicario. It's just
absolute lawlessness. I remember the
moment JJ looked at me and said,
and we both think of ourselves as
tough, I think, until we get in
these situations. And he looked
at me and went, "We're not safe."
And we looked at the people around
us at this side of the river
port, eight days up, and you
could tell everyone looking at
us was making a calculation
about how inconvenient it
would be to kill us. They were like:
camera, watch, clothing, backpack.
They were like, "That's a nice
backpack." You could tell they
were just shopping. And JJ
and me were like, "We're
gonna..." "Where are we putting
the tent tonight?" "We're not
staying here." Then I was like,
"Well, maybe we should stay."
And then one of the little Nahua
people came over to JJ asking for
food, and he made the mistake of
explaining money. They'd never
had money before. He gave them a
couple coins and said, "If you
go over there, that man will sell
you something and you can eat."
The guy was like, "Bow and arrow?"
JJ said, "No, give him this and
he'll give you food," and it
worked. Then JJ got swarmed by
60 of these little tribals with
bows and arrows, hands out. JJ was
running with all these half-naked
people behind him. That—
that whole saga right there
is like... That chapter's
gonna be called "River
of the Dolphin Fuckers"
'cause everyone we met on
the river kept telling us,
I'd have my camera with me and I'd go,
"Are there dolphins here?" And
they'd go, "Yeah, there's dolphins.
And if you fuck one, be careful
'cause they'll pull you under."
I went, "Okay, weirdo," to the first guy.
And then we got to like eight hours further
upriver, met the next guy and I had my camera out,
and I'm like, "Hey, are there any dolphins here?"
And he goes, "Yeah. If you fuck any, be careful."
He's like, "'Cause they'll grab on
and pull you under." And I was like,
"What?" And then four more people told me
the same thing. So I was like, "Okay."
- The lesson we learned in the jungle:
horned anacondas, believe 'em.
- Believe 'em. On that river, they were
all trying to be good Samaritans and
warn me about the clear and present
dangers involved with amorous dolphin
encounters.
- So stylistically, I mean, that
is a bit Cormac McCarthy.
- Ooh, he would've loved it.
- There are writers you draw inspiration from
like that. I mean, you're very close to him—
- It's too big of a compliment.
- You plug in every once in a while. You
jump around stylistically, actually.
- I do. It depends, because
sometimes I want to sink in and
flex a little bit, which I don't think
people really enjoy, but I enjoy it.
You know, talk about the... Just
use all those flowery words—
and make these beautiful metaphors.
But what I'm finding more and more is
that modern readers aren't really looking
for that. They want an easy read.
And for my style of storytelling,
people really tend to
thank me for more of an
Anthony Bourdain style,
where you're like, "So we found ourselves
on the side of this river and we knew we
were in danger. The reason we were in danger..."
And you just start telling the story.
Forget the... Maybe once every two pages
you can throw in one of those beautiful
little zingers, but nobody
wants to watch you flex.
- But also sometimes you go even more
than... I don't think Anthony Bourdain did
like Hemingway-like minimal, like—
word, period— word, like that.
That's another way to flex that I really
like that you do sometimes is just—
less, and just power in the spacing,
the silences. The unsaid
is what does the driving.
- I mean, that's what's so arresting.
You read like For Whom the Bell
Tolls. And, you know, "The air
was crisp, and the water was
sweet, and the wine was good,
and the afternoon was warm."
And you're like, "I know what that's like."
These are not complicated sentences,
but when he puts them together into a
paragraph, you go, "Oh, yeah. I want
to drink wine out of leather and
lay by the side of that stream."
It sounds so beautiful. And so sometimes,
you know, I mean, just look at that.
Look at that fire cracking
on the horizon there.
Sometimes the only way is
just these simple statements.
- Writing's beautiful. I love writing, I
love reading it. Have you interacted with
LLMs much? You know, AI systems? ChatGPT?
There's a bit of a scary and a sad
aspect to the fact that they can
generate language extremely well.
But something is missing, and it's
very hard to put your finger on it.
- My question to you is: I can
pick out with stunning accuracy
when someone sends me a message and
they've passed it through ChatGPT—
I know. Somehow I could
tell, and I don't know how,
but I could tell. It's one of
those things like with the images,
where we're at the point where
we can't tell anymore, almost.
I don't know if that's going to go away,
or if, like you said, there's something...
Like, one of the things that F.
Scott Fitzgerald does so much
is he describes these incredibly human
moments with such crystalline accuracy
that you go, "It must have
taken you a month. You
must have studied life
so much to be able to
string those words together."
I think in a book he writes
about someone screaming with such
abandonment that at the highest register,
her voice wobbled and cracked. And you're
like, "Oh my God, I know that sound."
And I wonder if... because
you can say, for example,
"Write me The Jungle Book, but make it
sound like Cormac McCarthy wrote it."
And it'll be like, "The jungle was dark
and stern, and the boy was..." You know?
It'll do it, and it's amazing.
But my question to you is,
what are we picking up on in something
as simple as a text message?
- It is very difficult to define. But
it's important to keep thinking about,
because: what makes us human?
- You reassured me recently
because I called you and I said,
of the jungle and all anybody
wants to talk about is AI."
It's like people are walking themselves
into the Matrix and asking to
be hooked. You know, everyone's
just obsessed with this topic.
And you were like, "Man,
human art and human
literature is going to actually become so
valuable as this other thing happens."
other thing happens." And I expected
the opposite answer. I thought you were
gonna be like, "Yeah, man, this really is.
Everything's gonna change." And you were like,
"Man, like, real artists are going
to become more appreciated."
- As more and more compelling and
effective bots appear on the internet—
... we're going to value
that less and less, I think.
And we're going to value human
interaction more and more.
So, you know, artists showing art at
galleries versus on the internet—
... meeting in person. And,
actually, it's going to
force people to be more authentic and
real and raw with each other. That's
going to be the valuable resource.
- I mean, I think already, AI
aside, I think that in today's
world, everyone's so... I
mean, movies have become so
polished. Like, there's no weird quirky
stuff. There's no risky stuff anymore.
It's all very, very curated. I've
almost stopped watching movies.
And I used to love movies. But it's fun
when they take risks, when
they're messy, when they're real.
- I think Hollywood, the Hollywood stars,
the Hollywood movie-making process
has become less and less popular
because of that. So I can't
wait for movies to be reinvented-
- Oh, I can't wait.
- ... for independent film. Just raw,
edgy, dangerous, all that kind of stuff.
- And all the actors we like are in TV
shows on various streaming platforms.
It's like they've all just gone home.
Like, they're not there. I was
literally like, "Man, I miss movies.
What happened to movies? I'm re-watching
all the old movies that I like."
And I was like, "Where is everybody?"
What are they doing? It's
like they all have a TV
series on Hulu or something,
you know? It's like, "Fuck."
- Yeah. I think it'll come. The
raw, the dangerous, the edgy.
- What we just described is almost perfect...
There's a scene in Dead Poets Society where Robin
Williams makes them open their books.
And the first page of the poetry book
is like, "How do you identify a good poem?"
He's like, "A good poem can be..." And he makes
a graph. And he's like, "By the subject of
the poem, and then the accuracy with which
it is described, you can tell whether
or not it's a good poem." The whole
class is sitting there bored. And he's
like, "Now rip that page out of your
book." And they rip the page out. And then
he's like, "Now stand up." And he's like,
"Now describe something." And he makes
them bleat it and scream it. And
it's almost exactly what we're describing.
It's like, yeah, you can turn it into a
graph if you need to, but it's
something way messier than that.
- Yeah. And Robin Williams, the person— ...
is a perfect example of a complicated,
beautiful human. I miss him. And whenever
I see clips of him come up, it's just-
I still to this day can't make
sense that a person like that can
take their own life. Somebody who's
brought so much joy to the world.
It scares me, man. It scares
me. I'm scared of my own mind
in that way, you know? That he
could be at the top of the world...
- But he had an illness.
- Yeah, that's what I understand.
Dude, life is a rollercoaster.
- I'm telling you.
- And you're living through it.
- As scary as that is... Since you
mentioned Robin Williams, I'll give you
this. My very close friend
Gleb, he has a story.
He was in New York City as a kid and
he saw Robin Williams walking down the
street. And he went up to him
and went, "Oh my God, it's Robin
Williams." And Robin was like, "Yeah." And he goes,
"Can I have an autograph?" He goes, "Do you have any
paper?" And my friend was
like, "No, I'm eleven." And
Robin Williams was like,
"Go get some paper."
His manager was with him and he was like, "Robin,
we don't have time. We gotta get up there."
And he was like, "Hold on. I told
the kid I'd give him a thing.
He'll be back." And my friend heard this
as he's thinking, "Just please stay,"
his whole life depended on this thing.
And he ran into a diner,
grabbed a napkin, ran back
out into the street. It took him a few minutes,
and Robin Williams was still sitting there.
This irate manager was there,
being like, "Come on, let's go."
Robin had waited there and
signed the napkin for him, and actually
did it with a smile and a wink, you know.
- Yeah, man. You can bring a lot of
joy to the world. Never forget
that. All those little
interactions. I love it. I love it.
- That was another one of Jane Goodall's
amazing quotes that I couldn't
reproduce, but it's that you
don't realize the degree to which
the things you do each day matter-
...even if it's just to the people
around you. And it's like you
are, to the people around you,
their entire life experience-
...if they're your kids, your parents,
your partner. So yeah, the things you do.
And if you can manage to put
that extra energy where you
put a little magic on it, where it is
fun. You show up home with something, you
know, play with the kids in a way that
surprises them. I had a good friend of
mine, Vinnie. I called him and
said, "What are you doing?" He
said, "Oh, I have a whole plan set
up. It's supposed to be really good
stars tonight. I'm putting
my daughter to bed."
He goes, "I'm gonna wake her up in the middle
of the night. I'm gonna have a candle."
"I'm gonna take her up to the roof
to go stargazing." He's like, "But I
want her to sleep. Remember when you
were a kid and you would wake up?"
He was curating a magical
experience for her to see the
stars, and like, making warm
tea and all this. Like,
man, you can just make it so great.
- Jane Goodall's the
reason you met this guy.
- That's right.
- You've continuously spoken
really highly of him, and he
gave me this book that he has recently
written, Echoes from Eden. Signed it.
- Yeah. Dax, A, saved my
life, and B, is the example
of what everybody wishes.
Dax made an amazing
company, amassed an amazing fortune, and
then said, "I'm gonna use it for good."
- He's given a lot of resources, a lot of
love, a lot of effort to
helping the Amazon rain
forest and the environment in general.
He's one of the only guys I know
who has a sexier beard than you.
- Yeah, he's got me beat big time.
- He wrote, "Thank you, brother, for your
love of the wild. This book is about
the heroes fighting on the front
line for nature. Together we can
protect Earth's last wild
places. Speak soon, Dax."
- He supported all these
initiatives. He went to the Amazon
with Jane. He supported Junglekeepers
and Sea Shepherd. And so
he really went out and said, "Okay, what are
the environmental projects that are doing the
most good? And where do I want to put my
resources?" It's like everyone always
whines about that. "How come these
guys don't..." And it's like he
did, and he got a lot done.
Then he went and visited all
those projects: sea turtles and Indonesian
orangutans and working with
Jane. And so then that
book is sort of a state of the
union on where conservation is at.
There's a lot of knowledge about how the
different strategies... It's so different
protecting sea turtle eggs versus
trying to save a river in the Amazon
versus Jane's global message of hope.
And then he has a guy in there who's
trying to save a specific part
of Sumatra, and it's just amazing stuff.
- The Congo.
- The Congo. And then he actually took
the time to go to these places and
see the operations on the ground.
- And are you still working with him?
- Yeah. Well, that's sort
of the... The way it
happened in my life was, the one time I
quit conservation was right around the
time COVID hit. I was going through
a divorce, I'm 32 years old, and I had no
job, no nothing. JJ's mom had COVID. Don
Ignacio the shaman had COVID. Pico's
leg was coming off. Nothing was
working. Nobody could go anywhere.
And I called Mohsin and I
was like, "I quit." I was like,
"We're never going back to
the jungle." The loggers just went
out and were tearing down everything.
I just said, "I got nothing."
And in the absolute
black depression, I called him and
I said, "I quit. I'm gonna go get a
job. I guess I'm just..." You
know, "I guess I've been like
jungle Peter Pan and it's time to grow
up." And I was really embarrassed
at the time that I did
that. And then I spent like four days just
laying in bed, with no idea what
to do. The only thing I can do is
this. And I had talked
to Dax months earlier,
told him my plan for protecting the river, for
making a ranger team, and he'd been looking
over the budgets and spreadsheets
and seeing if this was real.
He was still forming
Age of Union. And then
four days after I quit, the phone
rings and it's Dax. And he goes,
"Hey, I looked over the budget. I'd
like to make a 10-year commitment
to Jungle Keepers. Let's go." He had
no idea what I was going through,
and he was just like,
"Let's go." I was like,
going from that depressed to
that inspired in a single
conversation... You could
get the bends from that.
- Yeah, and it's not just the money- ...
it's that somebody believes in you.
- No, it's that he believes in
us, that we can... Money, you
know, that money means tuna
cans and gasoline and being
able to buy shoes, you know? We never
had those things before. We were just
living in the jungle watching our bodies
decay. And he was like, "No, I know
how to run a company, and I can tell
what you guys need to run
an organization." And he
did that and then has stuck by us. And
he came not that long ago
to the Amazon, and we...
And we took him around, and he
just looked around and went,
"I've never seen people..." Because he
said, "You guys remind me of a startup."
He said, "You're a mess." And that
was right before Stephan had come
And so now, he's seeing ranger teams and
boats going up and down. And we have
complex systems and a donor program,
and all these things are working well.
We're making progress and we have annual
reports and all this data. And he's like,
"Yo, you know, people have
donor fatigue, where they
donate money and don't know where
it's going." And he goes, "Here,
they can see what's happening."
So having someone like
Dax in your corner is a miracle, really.
In the book, it's gonna sound... A lot of
the things that happened to me in my life
sound like bad writing. You know in movies,
they have a gun to their head, and you go,
"They're not getting out of this one." And then
someone bursts through the door and saves
them. That's just happened too many times to
me. It sounds like bad writing,
but it's a really good life.
- Since you mentioned Stephan one
more time- ... one of my happiest
moments in life, and I had many
in the jungle with you, is just
talking late at night after
ayahuasca, funny enough-
... chatting with Stephan and Dan
and you, giggling and talking about
life and everything. And Dan is a guy I
have to give a shout-out to. You should
follow him on Instagram, Life with Dan.
He's an incredible wildlife photographer.
I've seen him; he's worked
quite a lot with you.
He has a love of nature, a
love of the wilderness, a love
of beauty, and is extremely good at
taking pictures, but just goes to the
edges with you. He's
the only guy I've seen
with the two giant cameras able
to follow you into the darkness.
- Well, Dan... First of all, that
picture I showed you where I'm in the
tree, because I told you the story
about with JJ where I climbed the giant
tree. Well, this is years later,
I climbed it with Dan. Dan was
there, and so he flew the drone
up and got me in the tree.
But what Dan's a really good example of is,
like you were saying, what would you say
to the kids? It's like Dan listened to our
talk, our first podcast, was living in
Singapore, and he's
like a young filmmaker.
Again, just get out there.
He signed himself up
to come on a Tamandua Expedition with my
company, and he showed up on the thing. And
sure enough, their boat broke down,
and I was off doing Junglekeepers
stuff, and someone was like, "Yo, their
boat broke down." So we show up and I
haul their boat and he comes up and says, "I'm
such a big fan. I just wanted to say hi."
I said, "Well, great. Hello." I said,
"Well, let's get you back on the
river." And then, you know,
someone came up to me and
said, "He's a really good photographer." I
said, "Everybody's a good photographer today."
I said, "That's great. Amazing. We have
Stefan and Mohsin. What else do we need?"
And then someone I trust was like,
"Hey, listen, look at his stuff.
It's not normal." And then I watched
a few of his videos and I went,
"Holy shit." And I went,
"Would you ever think
of coming down for a few weeks to film?"
And at the time, he was like, "No
way." He was so amazed. And now we're
bros. And we film together all
the time. But he put himself
in the position where he has
the skill, the insane skill.
I mean, some of his things—
he's doing tracking shots of a
white-winged sparrow over the water
where he's in the boat with an
800 millimeter lens, getting
these insane shots. I've
never seen a talent like him with video.
- But wildlife photography and documentary
filmmaking in general, it's not just
about the competence of being able
to pull off a difficult shot.
It's like the patience required
and the discipline to just sit
there and wait. I mean, when we
went out into the jungle, he waited.
- Yeah. I mean, even looking on
this page, that shot of the-
of the emerald tree boa there; he
got up before dawn to wait for the
sideways light. He had a vision
of lighting the snake from the
side. And then the macaws coming
off the clay lick. How many
days at the clay lick till he
got the explosion of macaws?
And I'm up in the tree and he's on
the walkie-talkie. And then also
your lenses are going to fog. You have
to be able to hike and do everything
everybody else is doing, and
your job. I mean, the dude is...
- You attract a lot of incredible
people because the mission is
clear and there's just like...
There's a vibrancy and energy to
the whole thing. It's exciting.
That's why the best people come to work
with you, come to hang out with you.
- It's become an amazing team.
I look around at the people
and I go, "How did this happen?"
- But it is getting more intense
and dangerous. I have to ask
you the thing we've talked about. What
do you think you'll do when you're
getting older? This is pretty intense.
Where do you see yourself years from now?
- I want to protect this river. We have to
protect this river in the next year and
a half or else we'll lose the chance.
Either I'm going to have... First book, I
got to the Amazon and it was wild. Second
book, we went, we built this amazing
organization and we got so close.
It'll be like those movies, like
Blow, where it's like, "For a
time it was amazing," and then
at the end... it's not so great.
- By the way, great movie.
- Great movie. But, you know, I'm writing
this story as it happens and,
you know, the endgame might be
written by somebody else. Or we
just got really close and then it
all fell apart. But we're 130,000
acres of the way. If we make it to
300,000, I'm calling it now,
I think enough people are going to learn
about this. It's going to tidal wave.
We're going to make an amazing documentary
about how we protected the wildest place
on Earth. And then I would love to
have a few kids, get a PhD, and teach
conservationists around the world
how to do this to save really wild
places, keep inspiring people,
keep writing books, keep going on
expeditions. I don't have any
problems with that. I can tell you, I
can't do this much longer
because the pressure of
wondering if it's going to be okay,
I've used all of it that I can.
My Lord of the Rings analogy of carrying
the ring; you can only do that for so
long. And so I'm actually
very excited to... I need to
know that it's safe. I
mean, that monkey that
I rescued out of the river,
or the toucan, Lucas, who
comes back to visit us. We
just saw a giant anteater not
that long ago with Dax
in the jungle. I know
these animals and I'm responsible for
protecting their home. It would be so
amazing to bring people to the treehouse
and show them this amazing place
and put out documentaries.
I have no problem
imagining a transition period.
I'd like to transition out
of Blood Diamond and go to more the
sort of professor role after this.
- You mean like an Indiana
Jones type of professor?
- Yeah. Running from the tribes.
...as long as it doesn't go supernatural at
the end, I'll be very happy. That always
kind of let me down.
- Well, thank you for giving
basically everything you got towards
this mission that you're doing. And
thank you for being who you are. It's been
an honor of a lifetime to be able to call
you a friend and to have
this conversation, brother.
This is the third time we've spoken. I
think we'll talk at least 10 more times,
and I think I speak for everybody
in saying thank you and please
don't die in trying to
save the rainforest.
- I have to say thank you to you
because our first conversation
changed everything. It really
did. In this story, it
brought so many more people
onto the mission. And
I think also lifted me up because, as we
often acknowledge, this can weigh
you down. And I often do get
weighed down and I lose hope
myself. And then I get lifted up by
moments like that where someone
I'm a huge fan of and who I
respect so much reaches out and goes, "Do you
wanna come to Austin and do this podcast?"
And I respond, "The Lex fucking Fridman
podcast?" But, you know, you've
really changed the narrative and
allowed this to be a reality, so.
- And everybody, go pre-order
The Jungle Keeper, the book, available
everywhere. And if you can, donate on
junglekeepers.org. This
is an important mission,
an ultra-competent team, and this
is such a beautiful part of the
world that I really,
really, really hope we
protect. So thank you for talking
today, and now let's go eat.
- Thank you, brother.
- Thanks for listening to this conversation with Paul
Rosolie. To support this podcast, please check out our
sponsors in the description, or
you can also find links to contact
me, ask questions, give feedback, and so
on. And once more, let me say thank you for
everything. Thank you for your support.
Thank you for the love. And thank you for
listening. And I hope
to see you next time.